<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Letters From Rome on the Council</title>
      <author><name reg="von Döllinger, Johann Joseph Ignaz">Johann Joseph Ignaz von Döllinger</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>November 23, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">38116</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="it"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-11-23">November 23, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Steven Giacomelli, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian
            Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Letters From Rome on the Council</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">By <q>Quirinus</q></p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">(Johann Joseph Ignaz von Döllinger)</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Reprinted from the <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Zeiting</hi>.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Authorized Translation.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Rivingtons</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">London, Oxford, and Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1870</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
These Letters of the Council originated in the following
way. Three friends in Rome were in the habit
of communicating to one another what they heard
from persons intimately acquainted with the proceedings
of the Council. Belonging as they did to different
stations and different classes of life, and having already
become familiar, before the opening of the Council,
through long residence in Rome, with the state of
things and with persons there, and being in free and
daily intercourse with some members of the Council,
they were very favourably situated for giving a true
report as well of the proceedings as of the views of
those who took part in it. Their letters were addressed
to a friend in Germany, who added now and then
historical explanations to elucidate the course of events,
and then forwarded them to the <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Zeitung</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Much the authors of these Letters could only communicate,
<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>
because the Bishops themselves, from whose
mouth or hand they obtained their materials, were
desirous of securing publicity for them in this way,
That there should be occasional inaccuracies of detail in
matters of subordinate importance was inevitable in drawing
up reports which had to be composed as the events
occurred, and not seldom had only rumours or conjectures
to rest upon. But on the whole we can safely
affirm that no substantial error has crept in, and that
these reports supply as faithful a portrait as can be
given of this Council, so eventful in its bearings on the
future history of the Catholic Church, and not only
conscientiously exhibit its outward course, but in some
degree unveil those more secret and hidden movements
whereby the definition of the new dogma of infallibility
was brought about. If it were necessary here to
adduce testimonies for the truth of these reports, we
might appeal to the actual sequence of events, which has
so often and so clearly confirmed our predictions and
our estimate of the persons concerned and their motives,
as well as to the Letters and other works of the Bishops,
whether published with or without their names.
</p>

<p>
This collection of Letters then is the best authority
for the history of the Vatican Council. No later historian
<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>
of the Council will be able to dispense with them,
and the Liberal Catholic Opposition, whose ecclesiastical
conscience protests against the imposition of dogmas
effected by all kinds of crooked arts and appliances of
force, will find here the most serviceable weapons for
combating the legitimacy of the Council.
</p>

<p>
In order to preserve the original character of the
Letters, as a chronicle accurately reflecting the opinions
and feelings of the Bishops of the minority, they are
published now in a complete collection without any
change, with the exception of a few corrections here
and there in a foot-note. Some articles from the
<hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Zeitung</hi> are prefixed to the Letters, which
have an important bearing on the previous history of
the Council;<note place='foot'>[It may be well to add, to preclude misconceptions, that both Letters
and Articles are exclusively the work of Catholics.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> and an appendix is subjoined containing
documents partly serving to throw a further light on
the history of the Council and partly to corroborate our
statements.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>September 1870.</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Views of the Council. (Allgemeine Zeitung, May 20, 1869.)</head>

<p>
Cardinal Antonelli is said on good authority
to have replied very lately to the question of
the ambassador of a Northern Government, that it
is certainly intended to have the dogma of Papal Infallibility
proclaimed at the ensuing Council; and,
moreover, as this has long been the belief of all good
Catholics, that there would be no difficulty about the
definition. It by no means follows, if this report is
correct, that the importance of the new principle of
faith to be created is not well understood at Rome.
The <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà Cattolica</hi> leaves no room for doubt that one
of its principal effects is already distinctly kept in view,
and that a further principle, which again must involve
an indefinite series of consequences, is being deliberately
aimed at.<note place='foot'>The weight to be attached to the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> on all questions connected
with the Council may be gathered from the Brief of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> of Feb. 12,
1866, printed in the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, Serie vi. vol. vi. pp. 7-15. The Pope declares
that this journal, expressly intrusted with the defence of religion and with
teaching and disseminating the authority and claims of the Roman See, is
to be written and edited by a special staff to be named by the General of
the Jesuits, who are to have a special house and revenues of their own.
The previous censorship, as is known in Rome, is exercised with particular
care, so that nothing appears without the approbation of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>.</note> In the number for April 3, it has
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
spoken with full approval, with reference to the approaching
Council, of the famous Bull of Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi>, doubly confirmed by Papal authority,
and addressed as a supreme decision on faith to the
whole ecclesiastical world, and treats it as self-evident
that all the contents of the Bull, with other doctrinal
decrees issued throughout the Church, will come
into full force after the Council, and thenceforth form
the basis of Catholic doctrine on the relations of
Church and State. The maxims that will have to be
adopted, as well by the learned as in popular instruction,
when once Papal Infallibility has been defined,
are these:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
The two powers, the temporal and spiritual, are in
the hands of the Church, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Pope, who permits the
former to be administered by kings and others, but only
under his guidance and during his good pleasure (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ad
nutum et potentiam sacerdotis</foreign>). It belongs to the
spiritual power, according to the Divine commission
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
and plenary jurisdiction bestowed on Peter, to appoint,
and, if cause arise, to judge the temporal; and whoever
opposes its regulations rebels against the ordinance
of God.
</p>

<p>
In a word, the absolute dominion of the Church over
the State will next year come into force as a principle
of Catholic faith, and become a factor to be reckoned
with by every Commonwealth or State that has Catholic
inhabitants; and by <q>Church</q> in this system must
always be understood the Pope, and the Bishops who
act under absolute control of the Pope.
</p>

<p>
From the moment therefore when Papal Infallibility
is proclaimed by the Council, the relations of all Governments
to the Church are fundamentally changed. The
Roman See is brought into the same position towards
other States which it now occupies towards Italy in regard
to the provinces formerly belonging to the States of the
Church. All States find themselves, strictly speaking,
in an attitude of permanent revolt against their lawful
and divinely ordained suzerain, the Pope. He indeed
on his side can and will tolerate much which properly
ought not to be&mdash;for it has long been recognised in Rome
that right, even though divine, by no means implies
the duty of always exercising it. In numberless cases
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
silence will be observed, or some such formula adopted
as that of the Austrian Concordat, art. 14: <q>Temporum
ratione habitâ Sua Sanctitas haud impedit,</q> etc. But
that must only be understood <q>during good behaviour,</q>
or so long as the times do not change or it seems
expedient. In conscience every Catholic is bound to
be guided, in the first instance, in political and social
questions, by the directions or known will of his supreme
lord and master the Pope, and of course, in the event
of a conflict between his own Government and the
Papal, to side with the latter. No Government therefore
can hereafter count on the loyalty and obedience
of its Catholic subjects, unless its measures and acts are
such as to secure the sanction, or agreement of the
Pope. As to non-Catholic Governments, moreover, the
former declarations of Popes against heretical princes,
which receive fresh life from the dogma of Infallibility,
come into full force. If it is already a common complaint
that in countries where the Government or the
majority are Protestant, Catholics are treated with
suspicion when they take any part in the service of
the State, and are purposely excluded from the higher
and more important posts, how will this be after the
Council?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Future Council. (Allg. Zeit., June 11, 1869.)</head>

<p>
We have received the following interesting information
from a trustworthy person, who is returned to Germany
after a long sojourn in Rome, where he was in a
position, among other things, to get to know the projects
for the Council. The relations of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> to the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>
may be fully understood from the fact&mdash;attested by the
officials of the Chancery&mdash;that the editors are regularly
admitted to an audience with the Holy Father, like
the prime minister, usually once a week, never less
often than every fortnight. At these audiences the
manuscripts prepared for the next number are laid before
the Pope, who reads them, and, according to his interest
in the contents, comments on them or returns them
unaltered to the Chancery. The ideas of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>
are therefore not only not unknown to the Pope, but
are published with his express and personal approval.
The chosen model of Pius IX. is Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi>, and his
favourite notion is to discharge that <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> in the present
Church which Gregory did in the middle ages. He is
therefore thoroughly given up to theocratic tendencies
in the contest against the modern State, and the attacks
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> upon it and the whole system of modern
civilisation express his innermost thoughts. Even the
General of the Jesuits is said often to be uneasy about
the language used by members of his Order in their
journal, and unable to avoid the apprehension that it
may seriously prejudice the Order hereafter.
</p>

<p>
In the Chancery, where Antonelli's confidant Mgr.
Marini revises the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, it very seldom happens that
any alterations are made in the articles, partly because
the Cardinal Secretary of State would at no price get
into bad odour with the Jesuits. Only the record of
contemporary events (<hi rend='italic'>Cronaca Contemporanea</hi>) is submitted
<foreign rend='italic'>pro formâ</foreign> to the Dominican Spada, the Master
of the Palace, for inspection. But although there can
be no shadow of doubt that in all its utterances about
the approaching Council the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, is simply the organ
of the Holy Father himself, Antonelli does not cease to
give the most reassuring answers to questions addressed
to him on the subject by the various diplomatic agents.
Rome, he assures them, will not take the initiative in
making either the propositions of the Syllabus or Papal
Infallibility into dogmas. Many representatives of
foreign Governments have been deceived by these declarations,
and have written home in that sense, the
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
immediate consequence of which was seen in the
reception accorded in some Courts to the despatch of
the Bavarian Government. But they will not allow at
Rome that they mean themselves to give the first
impulse for these solemn dogmatic decisions. That
only proves the confidence felt in the Vatican that a
considerable number of the Bishops will come forward
to demand it. It is a secret already pretty well published
in Rome, how the play is to be put on the stage,
and who is to be the protagonist. Nor does any one
there venture seriously to deny the fact that a version
of the Syllabus, composed by Father Schrader, at the
wish of the Pope himself, changing its negative theses
into positive, is already drawn up.
</p>

<p>
Archbishop Manning and Cardinal Reisach are the
leading persons in all these designs. Reisach,<note place='foot'>[Cardinal Reisach was absent at the opening of the Council, and died
soon afterwards, Dec. 26, 1869, in Savoy.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> who is
accounted in Rome a man of eminent learning and
wisdom, and who always manifests the most unbounded
devotion to the Pope, takes an unfavourable view of
German affairs. It was through him that Dr. Mast,
well known through what occurred at Rottenburg, was
placed on two of the preparatory Commissions (<hi rend='italic'>Politico-Ecclesiastica</hi>
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
and <hi rend='italic'>De Disciplinâ Ecclesiæ</hi>) as consultor.
So again, he has sought out Moufang of
Mayence and Molitor of Spires, for his own Congregation,
because he presumes them to be like-minded
with himself. The general rule in selecting persons
for the preliminary work has been to consider their
devotion to the cause, not their scientific capabilities.
First among them, in the directing Congregation of
Cardinals, must be named Bilio, who never loses an
opportunity in conversation of eloquently extolling
Papal Infallibility. To the same class belongs Panebianco,
a zealous friend of the extremest claims of the
Bourbons. Neither of them is known for learned
labours of any note, as neither are Barnabo and the
aged Patrizzi, who is named President of this Congregation
merely on account of his name and age. Among
the domestic consultors of the Commission on dogma,
known in literature, and as its very soul, sits the Jesuit
Perrone, who is become indispensable to the Pope; then
comes Spada, the Dominican, Master of the Palace, who
gained his theological reputation by a controversial
treatise in defence of eternal punishment; Cardoni,
who exhibited his strong views in a work advocating
the obligation of religious when named to bishoprics
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
still to live according to the rules of their Order; and
finally, Bartolini, who has vindicated the identity of
the Holy House of Loretto with the house of the Blessed
Virgin at Nazareth&mdash;all simply men of the most rigid
type. Among those employed in these preliminary
labours, Professor Biondo, of St. Apollinare, excels all
the rest, if in nothing else, in his conviction that true
devotion to the Church can only be found in Italy.
We may take as a significant illustration of the method
of choosing foreign consultors, the appointment of Mgr.
Talbot for England, who, when appointed, was out of
his mind, and has now been for four months in a
lunatic asylum. Among the French who are invited
the Abbé Freppel appears to be the most moderate.
But even in Rome there are many clergymen, and even
Cardinals, who do not conceal their opinion that with
such designs the Council will be an embarrassment for
Rome, and a danger for the Church. But nothing of
this comes to the ear of the supreme authority, nor
would information of it directly conveyed to the
Pope be likely to effect any change. Even the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
measures the sentiment of the Catholic world by the
homage paid to the Pope, and therefore the solemnity
can only encourage them in their designs about the
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
Council. It is sometimes feared that the French
Bishops may give trouble; any opposition on the part
of secular governments is not taken into account, for
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has completely broken with the modern State,
and has systematically ignored it both in the project
and the proclamation of the Council, while according
to the precedent of nearly all former Œcumenical
Synods, an understanding should have been come to
with the Catholic States as to the time and place of
holding it, and the subjects to be discussed. The
separation of Church and State in this last procedure
is the act of Rome, although the opposite theory is
sanctioned in the Syllabus. Anything like a literary
and scientific opposition, or a movement among the
laity, such as has here and there begun to show itself,
is regarded in the Vatican as a mere tempest in
a tea-cup.
</p>

</div>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Prince Hohenlohe and the Council. (Allg. Zeit., June 20 and 21, 1869.)</head>

<p>
In former times, the assembling of an Œcumenical
Council was caused by a general sense throughout the
Catholic world of some religious need, whether the definition
of an article of faith or the abolition of grave evils
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
and abuses&mdash;in short, a reformation&mdash;was felt to be
necessary. It was universally known what questions the
Council was to treat of. The sovereigns communicated,
for this end, with the heads of the Church and the
Pope, and brought forward their own wishes and requirements,
as at the last Œcumenical Council of
Trent, which had at least to be taken into consideration.
But how entirely different is this Council under
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>! Already, in 1854, an episcopal assembly, at
Rome, raised to the dignity of a dogma the thesis of a
theological school of the middle ages, combated even by
Thomas Aquinas, but which happens to have become a
favourite opinion of the Pope, although no ground had
been discovered for this new article of faith in any want
of the religious life which the Church has to cultivate.
And this was done against the judgment of a considerable
number of the prelates who were consulted, without
any basis for the doctrine being able to be found in
Scripture and Tradition, by the acclamations of the
assembled bishops&mdash;after a fashion, that is, in which
no dogma had ever been defined before. The Abbé
Laborde, who craved permission to lay his objections
before the assembly, received for answer his banishment
from Rome, and the name of another priest was
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
subscribed to the Bull proclaiming the dogma without
his knowledge or consent, so that he found himself
compelled to protest publicly against it. In view of
these facts, and under the just anticipation that at the
approaching Council the dominant party in Rome will be
equally tyrannical in their treatment of dissentients,&mdash;it
is already reported that three members of the present Commission,
who are opposed to Jesuit tendencies and practices,
have been suffered to retire&mdash;several distinguished
heads of the Church have renounced the idea of delivering
their testimony there. And how is this Council
the outcome of any urgent requirements of the Church's
life, and does Catholic Christendom know what end
it is designed to serve, and what is to be expected of it?
Nothing of the sort. The necessity of the Council, if it
will not put its hand to a reformation of the Church,
in accordance with the needs of modern civilisation, is
not everywhere understood by the clergy themselves.
Only this winter wishes were loudly expressed by some of
them that its assembling might be dispensed with, considering
the position of the Church in Austria and Spain;
but in the Holy Father's state of exaltation on the subject
these wishes could have no effect. Then again,&mdash;what
is perhaps without precedent in all Church history&mdash;the
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
the matters to be treated of in the Council have been
carefully kept secret; the Bull of Indiction confines
itself to vague generalities, and the theologians employed
in the preliminary labours were bound to silence
by the oath of the Holy Office,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Inquisition&mdash;imposed
under pain of excommunication to be incurred
<hi rend='italic'>ipso facto</hi>. It seems not to be necessary, therefore, at
least for the present, that Christendom should have
even any inkling of the doctrines on the acceptance or
rejection of which salvation or damnation is to be made
dependent.
</p>

<p>
It is not the satisfaction of real religious needs that
is contemplated&mdash;there would be no need to shun publicity
in that case&mdash;but chartering dogmas which have
no root in the common convictions of the Catholic
world. Leibnitz used to call even the Council of Trent
a <q>concile de contrabande;</q> the way in which this
last Council is to be brought on the stage would make
the designation for the first time fully applicable.
</p>

<p>
If these circumstances alone are enough to make
Governments that have Catholic subjects suspicious of
the designs of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, there are also further proofs
that their designs are not confined to strictly ecclesiastical
affairs, but involve direct encroachment on the life
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
of the modern State. Not to dwell here on the too open-hearted
confidences of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, which, although published
with the approval of the Holy Father himself,
have been characterized by him as an <q>imprudenza,</q><note place='foot'>[See Introduction to The Pope and the Council, pp. 1-4.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
we will pass to other facts which sufficiently indicate
the projected decrees of the Council.
</p>

<p>
To the inquiries of ambassadors about the reasons for
summoning a General Council, Antonelli could only
reply by referring to the great revolution and fundamental
change in civil and political relations. It may
be inferred from this declaration that the Council is
intended to discharge a political office also, and in what
sense, Rome has told us in the Syllabus and the condemnation
of the Austrian Constitution. For this
object an ecclesiastico-political consulting committee
has been formed, subordinate to the Commission intrusted
with the supreme control of the Council, with
Cardinal Reisach at its head, and whose Italian members
are as conspicuous for their want of scientific culture as
for their opposition to any concession to the requirements
of the age, and their hostility to all foreign
countries, and especially to the non-Roman portions of
Italy. The Syllabus will be put into shape in its
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
affirmative form by this Section, in order thus to be submitted
for sanction to the Council. One of its members
lately expressed himself in the following terms, with
the applause of his colleagues and of the Holy Father
himself:&mdash;<q>The Syllabus is good, but raw meat, and
must be carefully dressed to make it palatable.</q> This
skilful dressing, which is to make it everywhere acceptable,
it is hoped to effect by publishing the propositions
in the form of exhortations, instead of commands, which,
however, will come to the same thing, as the exhortations
emanate from the head of the Church.
</p>

<p>
It is with good reason that Prince Hohenlohe, in his
despatch, expresses the fear that the Council, according
to the programme of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, will publish decrees on
political rather than ecclesiastical questions, and he
rightly states that the projected dogma of Papal Infallibility
is also an eminently political question. For
when once that is defined, the mediæval pretension of
the Pope to dominion over kings and nations, even in
secular matters, which has never been abandoned, is
thereby also raised to the rank of an article of divine
faith. Thiers lately made the remarkable observation
that the temporal power alone holds the Pope in
check;&mdash;a monk, who was Pope, would think himself
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
omnipotent. Certainly, without the temporal
power, the maintenance of which depends on the goodwill
of the French Government, and the administration
of which keeps the Pope within a political area, he
would give freer rein, when it was possible, to his views
of the corruption of the modern State. Once seat a
monk on the Papal throne, as many have already sat
there, unacquainted with the actual world, and in heart
alienated from it, and arm him with the prerogative of
infallibility,&mdash;his decrees in the present condition of
society are sure to evoke the most deplorable conflicts.
</p>

<p>
The ultramontane press in Germany, which is itself
beginning to find the decisions sketched out by the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> intolerable, now adopts the tactics of denying
the official character of the Jesuit journal, and clings to
the straw of hope that neither Papal Infallibility nor
the Syllabus will be made dogmas. But it is no secret
in Rome that those alarming communications of the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> were letters written by French Jesuits, prepared
and published with the sanction of the Holy Father
himself, and cannot therefore be treated as mere chance
contributions of private correspondents.
</p>

<p>
For several years past the Court of Rome, with the
aid of its indefatigable allies the Jesuits, has been preparing
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
the way for securing beforehand the votes of the
Bishops on Papal Infallibility. Thus some years ago
the Bishops of different countries received, quite unexpectedly,
an urgent admonition from Rome to hold
Provincial Synods, and frame decrees at them. These
decrees had to be sent to Rome, to the Congregation exclusively
charged with the revision of such ordinances,
and were then returned, after correction and enlargement
by the Cardinals and Committees of the Congregation.
When they came to be printed, it was found that all
these Synods had shown a wonderful unanimity in adopting
Papal Infallibility as a self-evident principle into
their exposition of universally known Catholic doctrine.
The Jesuit organs have not failed to point triumphantly
to these decisions of so many Bishops and Synods.
</p>

<p>
It is a fact that Antonelli publicly declared there
could be no difficulty about the promulgation of Papal
Infallibility, because it was a doctrine already held by
all good Catholics. And this is the watchword of the
whole ultramontane party at Rome. It is also a fact
that the question was brought before the directing Commission
in order to be put into shape, and then submitted
for confirmation to the Council. And although it is
certain that the discussion of it by the Commission is
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
finished, the decision will be carefully kept secret for
a time, because as yet courage fails them for a straightforward
course of procedure, and they hope to gain
their end by a sort of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>coup d'état</foreign>, viz., carrying the
dogma by spontaneous acclamation, to be evoked by a
foreign prelate.<note place='foot'>[Cf. <hi rend='italic'>The Pope and the Council</hi>, p. 6.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> And thus Governments will be deprived
of the opportunity of gaining any influence over
the decisions of the Council, and protecting themselves
against threatening eventualities.
</p>

<p>
Well-informed persons, who do not deny the intention
of making Infallibility into a dogma, think that
some innocuous formula will at last be discovered, such
as prefixing a <q>quasi</q> to <q>infallibilis,</q> so that all the
trouble expended in gratifying this darling wish of
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix</hi>. will be almost labour lost. But so long as the
decision rests with the Jesuits, who have an overwhelming
majority in the preparatory Congregation, there is
no ground for this hope. They foresee the possibility of
being again driven from the helm a few days after the
death of the Pope, and therefore press for an unqualified
definition, that they may make capital out of the infallible
Pope for conquering a new position of influence for
themselves in civilized Catholic countries. And if they
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
could not reckon without some regard to other factors
also, still their calculations had a good prospect of
success, for Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix</hi>. is completely in the hands of the
Jesuits, especially of Father Piccirillo, the chief person
on the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> staff, who will act as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>spiritus rector</foreign> of
the Council. The Pope is seldom left alone, lest he
should fall under the influence of others who judge
more correctly of the situation of the modern world and
the real wants of the Catholic Church; he lives in an
artificial atmosphere of homage poured forth by the
ultramontane journals. He is so possessed with a sense
of his own power that he believes he ought not to
regard or fear any possible opposition of the French
Government to the decisions of the Council.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile there are growing signs that at least a
portion of the French episcopate are not willing to
degrade themselves to the humiliating <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> of mere
acclaimers to the propositions of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. In two
articles of the <hi rend='italic'>Français</hi> (for March 18 and 19) Dupanloup
has already decisively disclaimed sympathy with
the tendencies and insinuations loudly expressed in the
notorious correspondence of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>. He gives a
specimen of the hopes and wishes about the Council
intimated by the French Bishops in their pastorals,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
where he shows that they are all far from expecting
it to assail political and social liberty and freedom of
conscience, to condemn modern civilisation and widen
the breach between the Catholic Church and other
Christian bodies, by proclaiming new dogmas; but, on
the contrary, that they look for a reformation of Church
discipline adapted to the age, and a work of general
reconciliation with the great ideas of cultivation, freedom,
and the common weal. These declarations of the
French episcopate excited great surprise and deep disgust
at Rome, without, however, to all appearance,
having disturbed the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> in their plans, as they know
from the statistics that they can count on an imposing
majority in the Council.
</p>

<p>
Seats are prepared for 850 Bishops at the Council,
but the question whether Bishops <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign> are to
have decisive votes is not yet decided. Since, however,
their admission will not materially affect the relative
position of the two parties, they may be left out of the
account. To these voting members of the Council must
be added 57 Cardinals, and the number might be raised
before its opening to 72, by the bestowal of the 15 hats
vacant at present. There are thus about 920 decisive
votes, including 40 Italian Cardinals, 294 Italian
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
Bishops, 66 Spanish, 22 Portuguese, 90 French,&mdash;in all
512 prelates of the Romance race in Europe, to whom
must be added 77 Brazilian, Mexican, and South American
Bishops, raising the whole Romance representation
to 600 votes. From this number about 60 must be
deducted for vacant Italian Sees, and some 140 who
may presumably be unable to attend. And so about
400 are left, whose votes, with the exception of a number
of French Bishops, are counted upon by the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>.
The Court also reckons on the votes of 48 from England
and Ireland, 52 from North America, 20 from Greece
and Turkey, 6 from Belgium, 5 from Holland, and 16
from Canada. If the Polish and Russian Bishops are
allowed to come, they too will swell the majority; and
so, it is believed, will the Armenian and Uniate Bishops
in Austria, Russia, and Bulgaria, numbering about 40.
Of the 65 German and Austrian Bishops scarcely half
will side with the Opposition. And so, if matters are
to be settled by majorities, the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> is fully assured
of its victory. Cardinal Antonelli counts on from 500
to 600 votes of those actually present.
</p>

<p>
Under these circumstances the Governments of
countries with Catholic populations should be urgently
pressed to devote their serious attention to what is
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
already going on in Rome, and not to let themselves be
taken by surprise by the decrees of the Council, which,
when once promulgated, will place their subjects in a
painful dilemma between their duties towards the State
and their obedience to the Church; will everywhere
create disquiet and conflicts; and must, above all, involve
their Bishops in contradictions with the Constitutions
they have sworn to observe. In the present
difficulties of the general political and social situation
in Europe, a conflict in the highest degree fatal might
ensue with the Church, whose mission of culture is not
yet diminished even for the time, and whose co-operation
for its own purposes the State cannot dispense
with. In this contest the Church cannot conquer,
because the spirit of the age is against her; but the
very crash of so mighty an edifice would cover and
destroy with its ruins the institutions of the State
itself, perplex consciences, and entail universal mischief
by for the first time fully confirming the spirit
of absolute negation of the ethical and ideal conception
of life. The proceedings of Prince Hohenlohe
may have sprung from this statesmanlike consideration;
they are inspired by a friendly spirit towards the Church
herself, and are of a thoroughly loyal character. He
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
wishes the Governments openly to communicate with
their Bishops, in order to point out to them the deplorable
consequences which must follow from so premeditated
and systematic a revolution of the existing relations
between Church and State, and also, while there is still
time, to take precautions against the event of conciliar decrees
encroaching on the political domain. He challenges
the learned corporations of the State most directly competent,
to give their opinion publicly as to the practical
results involved in making the Syllabus and Papal
Infallibility into dogmas. This proceeding is far from
being premature, for it is the business of a statesman
not only to legislate in view of accomplished facts, but
to provide for menacing dangers, nor will his conduct
be blamed by any true friend of Church and State, whose
faculty of judgment is not utterly blinded by hatred.
The repressive measures which Governments would be
compelled to employ after the promulgation of the contemplated
dogmas would not be at all in the interest of
the Church. Suppose, for instance, freedom of conscience,
already condemned in the Syllabus, were anathematized
by the Council, and the doctrine of religious
compulsion sanctioned, the Bavarian Bishops who had
assented to this decree, or wished to obey it, would
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
have broken their oath to the Constitution, the Constitution
which guarantees freedom of conscience would
be under the ban of Rome, and the Government would
have to answer by publishing the Concordat.
</p>

</div>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Council. (Allg. Zeit., Aug. 19, 1869.)</head>

<p>
If the present situation in regard to the Council is
considered, the triumph of the Jesuit ultramontane
party there appears highly probable. The demonstration
of the Rhenish Catholics has as yet assumed no larger
dimensions, and will evidently gain nothing by the
projected Catholic meeting at Düsseldorf; for not only
is red-hot ultramontanism a decisive obstacle, but the
widely growing and deepening religious indifference
hinders men from taking any part in movements
based on a spirit of loyalty to the Church. In Rome,
accordingly, little notice is taken of the movement, and
satisfaction is felt at the prospect of expelling this
mischievous liberal element from the Church, because
then it is hoped the kernel which remains true may be
more boldly dealt with. Our German ultramontane
press, which lost no time in making a bitter and contemptuous
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
attack on the address of the Rhenish Catholics,
is therein only the exponent of the mind of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>.
Meanwhile the German Bishops are preparing themselves
to commit an act of doctrinal and ecclesiastical
suicide, by renouncing for ever their long obscured but
not as yet surrendered rank and authority as supreme
judges of faith.<note place='foot'>These fears, as is well known, were not realized at Fulda.</note> Two of them, Bishops Ketteler of
Mayence and Fessler of St. Pölten, have already pronounced
in separate works for the infallibility of the
Pope.
</p>

<p>
The diplomatic action of Prince Hohenlohe in regard
to the Council has indeed created for the time a sensation,
which still continues among the States interested
in the matter, and which eventually culminated in the desire
to obtain further information about the propositions
to be submitted for the acceptance of the assembled
Bishops, but even the representative of France has
been baffled by the arts of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. When, in June,
M. Banneville put the decisive question whether they
were not prepared to deny the alarming rumours as
to the propositions to be laid before the Council, and to
take immediate steps for facilitating the representation
of Catholic States in the Council through ambassadors
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
of their own, Antonelli replied that he had no knowledge
of what was going on in the Commissions, but as
to the second point, the Church in her present changed
relations with Catholic States, which sometimes persecute
her and sometimes put her on an equality with
other religious bodies, could not take the initiative.
M. Banneville, who had simply spoken of the presence
of an ambassador at the Council, but had said nothing of
his rights, stated that this conversation had <q>profoundly
humiliated him.</q> Thenceforth the Court of Rome was
the more confirmed in its resolve to keep out diplomatists
from the Council. To an indirect question as
to the admission of an ambassador from non-Catholic
States, which have a large Catholic population, an
instant negative was returned. The quarrel of the
Austrian Government with the Bishop of Linz has
given a further impulse in the same direction, for then
Antonelli began to declare more openly that it was
indeed possible, but not likely, that any ambassadors
would be admitted, till now at last he makes no secret
of its being out of the question for Rome, under existing
circumstances, to think of allowing Governments to be
represented. It would not be feasible, he opines, to
admit France alone, and what other Catholic States are
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
there that have not already disqualified themselves for
taking part in the Council? Thus by degrees France
too is gently thrust aside with her inquiries and demands,
and the only question is whether Napoleon's
Government will be content with this. Unless the
clerical party in France itself causes the Emperor to
assume an attitude of opposition to the Jesuit ultramontane
programme of the Council, there is not much
to be expected from him, since in view of the
internal difficulties his Government at present has to
contend with, he is obliged to take that party into
account as an important factor in his calculations.
</p>

<p>
The Jesuits work assiduously in France, as well as
Germany, to form a propaganda for the projected dogmas,
and to familiarize men's minds with the idea that
absolute certainty and inerrancy are only to be found
with one man, viz., the Pope. Bouix in Paris, and
Christophe at Lyons, have, with the <hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Univers,</hi>
already most urgently inculcated on the Bishops what
<q>good Catholics</q> expect of them in regard to the acclamation.
But, with the exception of the Bishop of
Nîmes, none of them have openly adhered to the
Jesuit programme of the Council; on the contrary, the
attitude of the French episcopate is perhaps at this
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
hour the only black speck on the horizon of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>.
And in fact with them rests the decision in the present
ecclesiastical crisis. To the French episcopate it belongs
to show that they still preserve the great traditions of internal
freedom in the Church, newly brought to light since
the mediæval reforming Councils by French theologians,
and thenceforth always conspicuously represented
among them, and that they are filled with the spirit of
Bossuet, who did not confound loyalty to the Church
with blind devotion to unfounded claims of the Pope,
but understood it to mean, above all things, loyalty to
the ancient spirit and original institution of the Church.
</p>

<p>
But there are good grounds for hoping that at least
a majority of the French Bishops will constitute a free-spoken
opposition at the Council; the two French
theologians Freppel and Trullet, as well as Cardinal
Bonnechose, are said to have exercised a most powerful
influence in this direction.<note place='foot'>The Cardinal's subsequent attitude has not justified this hope. Freppel
too, as Bishop-designate of Anjou, has now declared himself for the
infallibilists.</note> The latter openly complains
that words of moderation are not listened to in Rome,
and that, up to this time, giving any definite declarations
of a reassuring nature has been avoided. He is understood
to have said plainly that the great majority of the
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
French episcopate wished to keep peace with the State,
and would lend no hand to the sanctioning of extreme
tendencies. It is even rumoured that a collective remonstrance
of the French Bishops on the notions prevalent
at Rome is already contemplated, but has not yet been
able to be carried out on account of some hesitation
about the mode of action. Much may be hoped from
Dupanloup's attitude at the Council; in him freedom
of discussion and voting is sure to find a representative
equally bold and eloquent.
</p>

<p>
But even the opposition of the French Bishops will
produce no results, if the decisions of the Council are
to depend on majorities, for there can be no doubt that
Rome may safely count on the great majority upholding
her designs. We should have a repetition of what occurred
in the Doctrinal Commission, when the question of
Infallibility came before it, and a Monsignore and titular
Bishop, residing in Rome, produced a memorial intended
to prove that this high prerogative of the Pope had been
the abiding faith of the Church all along, and arguing
from this belief for the opportuneness of promulgating
the new dogma, on the ground especially, among others,
that at no period had the Bishops been so devoted to the
Holy See as now. It is natural to expect of men so submissive,
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
and so ready to follow every hint of the Papal
will, that they should joyfully seize the occasion for
offering this grand homage also to the Pope. This was
so conclusive to the Committee that they all decided
at once, without any discussion, for the promulgation of
the new dogma. Only one of the two German theologians,
Alzog of Freiburg, opposed it; Schwetz of Vienna,
on the other hand, fully agreed. For Rome, therefore, the
question is settled, and whoever is otherwise minded at
once forfeits his character for Catholic orthodoxy.
</p>

<p>
Nor is there any more doubt about making the
Syllabus dogmatic, for Roman prelates, who wish to
have the character of being very enlightened, openly
affirm that the propositions contained in it might
already be regarded as dogmas. And it is stated on the
best authority, even by high dignitaries themselves, that
the whole of the seventeen questions laid before the
assembled episcopate by Cardinal Caterini at the time
of the Centenary, are to come before the Council for
discussion, on the basis of the opinions then transmitted
by the Bishops to Rome. And as a considerable number
of these questions concern the relations of Church and
State&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, civil marriage, the relations of Bishops to
the civil power, etc.,&mdash;it is clear enough what credit is
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
to be given to the assurances that the Council will
not deal with any matter that could involve the Church
in conflict with the State. It was found almost necessary,
after public opinion had been alarmed by the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, to change the method of procedure. It
was either expressly denied that the Council would
deal with such matters as the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> had indicated,
or it was said that even in Rome what subjects
would come on for discussion and decision was
unknown, since the intentions of the Bishops, at present
scattered over all parts of the world, were not
known, and on the general ground that the decisions of
a Council acting under Divine guidance cannot be conjectured
beforehand. As if the recent Provincial
Synods, and the answers of the Bishops to the questions
laid before them by Caterini, had not supplied
Rome with a perfectly clear understanding of their
views! As if it was not notorious that the work the
Council was desired to accomplish had been already
cut out for it in detail in the preparatory Congregations!
</p>

<p>
Now, at length, if we may trust a communication
dated from Rome in the <hi rend='italic'>Donau Zeitung</hi>, the authorities
seem inclined to abandon this system of playing at hide-and-seek
with the public, and find it necessary, in some
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
measure at least, to lift the mask from their designs
for the Council. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> himself is said no longer to
make any secret of his intention to bring forward the
question of Infallibility; but he declares that the
Council will be left entirely free in discussing and
deciding on it, and that it will only be raised to a
dogma if a large majority pronounce for it. And with
this agrees a recent statement of Antonelli, made in
the teeth of his earlier declarations, that the Holy
Father will meet the Council with positive proposals of
his own, and that no doubt can be allowed as to the
acceptance of his authority. This last clause shows
what is meant in Rome by the so-called freedom to be
enjoyed by the Council. If then that freedom is all
of a sudden pointedly dwelt on, this is only one of
the devices of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> for hoodwinking public opinion,
just as eminent theologians of liberal tendencies
were summoned to the previous Commissions, which
were none the less occupied with duties of a precisely
opposite kind.
</p>

<p>
It may be conceived that loyal but far-sighted
Catholics, like Montalembert, are profoundly afflicted
at the course things are taking in questions of decisive
interest for the authority and the whole future of the
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
Church, The religious indifference of the age will prevent
any open schism in the Catholic Church, but the
internal apostasy will be all the more extensive. All
modern culture will separate itself in spirit from the
Church, which has nothing but anathemas for the
development of the human mind. And when an Œcumenical
Council, which is the highest teaching authority
in the Church, degenerates into the instrument of
an extreme party, and sanctions doctrines in glaring
contradiction to the teaching and history of the Church,
the very foundation on which the confidence of faith
has hitherto reposed is undermined and destroyed.
And thus the ever growing rejection of Christianity
will be powerfully strengthened, so that even believing
Protestants watch with sorrow an Œcumenical Council
preparing to compromise its authority. Very different,
of course, is the view of men like Manning and Ward,
who fancy the definition of Papal Infallibility will be a
short and easy way for restoring their countrymen to
the bosom of the Catholic Church. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix</hi>. himself
is indeed convinced that he is only building up the
Church and crowning her work in placing the dogma
of Infallibility on it as a cupola.
</p>

<p>
It has been thought fit by statesmen to exercise no
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
constraint on the designs of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, but to await its
decisions, and afterwards, if they should be menacing
to political interests, to employ measures of repression.
This conduct cannot, of course, accord with the mind of
believing Catholics who are not ultramontanes, as it
leaves their obligations towards those articles of faith
untouched, and cannot annul the definitions for their
consciences. But the question arises, whether from a
political point of view this expedient must not be pronounced
a mistake. Consider the dangerous influence
conciliar decrees provoking hostility against the modern
State and its civilisation may exert on those numerous
classes, which are always in the hands of the clergy,
and form an important factor in the life of the State.
Consider, again, what is to be expected in this respect
of a clergy who, as everything serves to indicate, will
hereafter more than ever before be alienated from all
modern culture, on the express ground of the decrees
of the approaching Council, educated in a spirit of
hostility to the State, and made into a mere passive
instrument of Rome. It is difficult to exaggerate the
conflicts between Church and State that may be expected
to follow.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Fulda Pastoral. (Allg. Zeit., Sept. 25, 1869.)</head>

<p>
The Pastoral which the Bishops assembled at Fulda
ordered to be read in all the Churches under their
jurisdiction is an important document. It reflects the
excited and abnormal state of feeling prevalent among
Catholics, since the Jesuits, and some Prelates allied
with them, have announced the design of using the
Council for proclaiming new dogmas, especially that of
Papal Infallibility. <q>Even among loyal and zealous
members of the Church,</q> say the Bishops, <q>anxieties
calculated to weaken confidence are being excited.</q>
The object and main substance of their Pastoral is
directed to allaying those anxieties, and assuring German
Catholics that their Bishops at least will not
assent to the projected dogmas. They have solemnly
pledged their word, before the whole nation, that they
will avouch at the Council the three following principles&mdash;<emph>first</emph>,
<q>That the Council can establish no new
dogmas, or any others than are written by faith and
conscience on all your (German Catholics') hearts;</q>
<emph>secondly</emph>, <q>That a General Council never will or can
proclaim a new doctrine not contained in Holy Scripture
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
or Apostolic Tradition;</q> <emph>thirdly</emph>, That only <q>the
old and original truth will be set in clearer light.</q>
</p>

<p>
This indeed is very re-assuring. The Jesuits have
proclaimed that the bodily Assumption of the Holy
Virgin and the Infallibility of the Pope are to be made
dogmas at the Council. The Bishops are aware that
the two Jesuit organs, the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Rheinischen
Stimmen</hi>, from the Monastery of Laach, as well as the
Archbishop of Mechlin (Deschamps), and Bishop Plantier
of Nîmes, have put forward the erection of Papal
Infallibility into a dogma of the Universal Church.
Moreover, the assembly at Fulda knew well enough
that the preliminary materials for this definition were
already prepared at Rome. Now nobody will seriously
maintain that these two opinions are written
by faith and conscience on the heart of every Catholic,
or are doctrines contained in Scripture and Tradition,
and ancient and original truths. The Pastoral therefore
contains a promise, worded with all the distinctness
that could be desired, that, so far as it depends on
the votes of the German Bishops, the yoke of the new
articles of faith shall not be laid on the German
nation.
</p>

<p>
The German Bishops cannot of course pledge themselves
beforehand for the whole Council, for they will
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
have at most only about 25 votes at their disposal&mdash;a
small number in an assembly of 400 or 500 bishops.
But if these 25 votes, which represent nearly eighteen
million Catholics, and the whole of a great nation,
remain united and firm, they are a guarantee that the
new dogmas will not be decreed. For it is not majorities
or minorities that decide on dogmas, but the Church
requires the actual or approximate unanimity of the
whole assembly. And it may be assumed as probable
that the Austrian Bishops will not separate themselves
from their German colleagues in these weighty questions,
except, of course, the Bishop of St. Pölten, who already
openly declares himself for the principal new dogma,
and will therefore no doubt vote for it. It may, moreover,
be confidently asserted that a considerable portion
of the French Bishops will unite with the German
Opposition against the new dogmas. And an Opposition
so numerous and so compact will make it impossible
for the Latin Prelates to carry through their pet
doctrines, powerful as they may appear, if their votes
are counted and not weighed.
</p>

<p>
From another point of view, too, the Pastoral is noteworthy
and gratifying. It markedly discountenances
that pessimism which for some thirty years past has
characterized Papal documents, and which gave occasion
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
to the observation that Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> and his predecessor
whine whenever they talk Latin. Occurrences in Italy,
Spain, and Germany, and the history of the Austrian
Concordat, with many other things, have led most of the
clerical organs to take a gloomy view of the state of the
world; and we frequently find them maintaining that
a universal overthrow of the whole order of society in
the Christian world, a universal deluge, is inevitable, but
that the ship of the Church, the one asylum of safety, will
float, like the ark, upon the waves, and then will begin
a new order of things, and new period of history corresponding
to the ultramontane ideal. In sharp antithesis
to these gloomy pictures and predictions, the Bishops
declare, <emph>first</emph>, that throughout the world the kingdom of
God increases with fresh vigour, and brings forth fruit;
<emph>secondly</emph>, that all attacks on the Church, and sufferings
brought upon her, work for her good; and <emph>thirdly</emph>, that
religious and ecclesiastical life is strengthened. Such
a view as this is better calculated to arouse and sustain
attachment to the Church and confidence in her indestructible
powers of life and providential guidance than
the opposite view, which exhibits to Catholics everywhere
nothing but the humiliation of their Church and
the triumph of her enemies.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>The Bishops and the Council. (Allg. Zeit., Nov. 19 and 20, 1869.)</head>

<p>
As the moment for the opening of the Council
approaches, the excitement and disquiet, not only of
Catholics but of all who concern themselves with the
movements of the day, increases in view of so important
an event. For the notion that the Council is merely
an internal affair of the Catholic Church, and that its
decrees will be confined to the sphere of the religious
conscience, will be accepted by nobody who has heard of
the projects entertained by the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and who is not
ignorant of the close connection of the Church with the
culture of modern life, and the powerful position this
gives her in the State and in the social order generally.
</p>

<p>
We may safely state that the Fathers of the Council
are already divided into two camps, and that anxiety
and painful uncertainty prevail in both of them. The
occurrences of the last few weeks have brought out
their opposite views and designs into sharp contrast. It
is now known in Rome that a considerable number of
Northern Bishops are not disposed to accept the <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign>
assigned to them of simple assent to ready-made decrees,
and that the German Bishops, except those trained by the
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
Jesuits, most decisively object to making new articles of
faith. Many Bishops also dread the far-reaching consequences
of Papal Infallibility, and the retrospective
effects of the new dogma, and they know that the establishment
of such doctrines would drive the educated
classes of the country, if not into open schism, to an internal
and lamentable breach with the Church. Accordingly,
remonstrances have been forwarded to the Pope
from three quarters&mdash;from the Prelates of Hungary, Bohemia,
and Germany,&mdash;expressing the most emphatic
desire that the Council should not be forced to any decision
on Papal Infallibility, or on matters affecting the
relations of Church and State, in the sense of the Syllabus.
What reception this document met with in Rome
may readily be divined from the great astonishment the
Fulda Pastoral is known to have excited there, when a
translation of it was laid before the Pope. It is now
thought politic in Rome to deny the existence of these
letters of remonstrance, but they have taken such effect
that the highest authorities begin to hesitate, and ask
themselves the question whether they have not gone
too far in their confident assurance of victory. The idea
of being able to carry the Infallibility dogma off-hand
by acclamation seems at least to have been abandoned.
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
It is understood that some less summary method of
gaining their object must be resorted to, if it is to be
gained at all. And hence at the last moment they have
begun to look out for some Council Chamber where the
Bishops may discuss the matters to be decided upon,
for the chapels appropriated to the Council in St. Peter's
are only designed for solemn sessions.<note place='foot'>This design does not seem to have been persevered in.</note> It is said in
Rome that the pungent remark of a Cardinal to the Holy
Father has had something to do with the change of the
original scheme of an acclamation. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> had asked
his opinion as to the most effective way of carrying the
decrees, and he replied, that obviously the <emph>theatrical</emph> effect
would be greater if there was no debating, but simply
decision by acclamation, as though by inspiration of the
Holy Ghost. And thus the hope of getting the Council
over in three weeks is also given up, and it is now expected
to last to the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul.
</p>

<p>
The drawing up of the letter of remonstrance at
Fulda is said not to have been such plain sailing. The
Pastoral originally sketched out by Heinrich, Canon of
Mayence, but to which important additions were made
subsequently, was subscribed by all the Bishops, even
those who had been pupils of the Jesuits, who consoled
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
themselves with the belief that the dogma of Infallibility
did exactly combine the conditions specified
there as requisite for a dogmatic decree, and was
really scriptural, primitive, and written on the hearts
of all good Catholics. So their Jesuit masters had
taught and assured them. But the secret document
sent to the Pope had necessarily to be more explicit,
and though it was limited to pointing out how inopportune
the definition of new dogmas, especially of Papal
Infallibility, would be, that was precisely opposite to
what the Jesuitizers among the Bishops were convinced
of. The Jesuits themselves lose no opportunity of
proclaiming that nothing can be more opportune than
this dogma, and from their own point of view they may
be right enough, for the rich and ripe fruits of the
dogma would fall into their own laps, and would help
the Society to absolute dominion over science, literature,
and education within the Catholic Church. The
proposed dogma would give canonical authority to the
Jesuit theology, and identify it with the doctrine of the
Church, and the Order, or the spirit of the Order, would
always be required for teaching and vindicating the
new system. The Bishops of Paderborn and Würzburg
therefore refused to sign, and the representative of the
Bishop of Spires followed their example.
</p>

<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>

<p>
The scruples of these Northern Bishops were so utterly
unexpected that they must have created great surprise
at Rome. Their informant in the matter of the Infallibility
dogma had assured the authorities, in the teeth of
the Northern Prelates, and with the full concurrence of all
the members of the Commission, that no fitter or more
favourable time could be found for establishing the new
dogma, for at no former period could the Court of Rome
reckon so securely on the unconditional devotion of the
Bishops, nor was there ever a time when they were so
ready as at this moment to surrender before the Pope
all exercise of their own judgment or independent
examination. The remonstrances of the Hungarian,
Bohemian, and German Bishops have of course poured
water into this wine, to the no small astonishment and
indignation of the Roman Prelates, with whom it is an
axiom that nobody is a good Christian who does not
believe the infallibility of the Pope as firmly as the
divine mission and truthfulness of Christ. Accordingly,
the <hi rend='italic'>Correspondance de Rome</hi> cast in the teeth of Prince
Hohenlohe, that since all true Catholics already hold
the infallibility of the Pope when speaking <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign>,
a decree of the Council will only confirm what is universally
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
known and believed.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Corresp. de Rome</hi>, 1869, p. 384: <q>L'infallibilité du Pape, décidant
en matière de foi <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign>, c'est-à-dire comme maître de l'Eglise étant
déjà admise par tous les vrais catholiques, un décret du Concil fera juste
l'effet d'une confirmation d'une chose universellement sue et crue.</q></note> Let those good souls who
flatter themselves that the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, with its expectations
and demands, stands alone, weigh well the utterances
of so well-known a journal.
</p>

<p>
The Austrian Bishops have not thought it well to
follow the example of their Hungarian, Bohemian, and
German colleagues. One of them, Dr. Fessler, is notoriously
the most determined advocate of the whole
ultramontane system, and was the first Bishop to declare
the definition of the new dogma to be at once a
natural and suitable work for the Council. His services
were promptly rewarded; he is already named chief
secretary of the Council, and his hand will press heavily
on its decrees. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> may congratulate itself on
its choice. The silence of the Austrian Bishops is
further explained by the differences of opinion among
them about the questions coming before the Council.
</p>

<p>
In their secret letters the Northern Bishops have
opposed the new definition only as being inopportune,
and it is known that the French Opposition Bishops
mean to take the same ground. But it deserves careful
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
consideration whether this line of action can be
really tenable or effective at the Council. Surely it
may be certainly foreseen that the far more numerous,
and, from its determined attitude, stronger party on the
other side will answer, <q>If your only objection to the
dogma is that it is unsuited for the times, you thereby
admit its truth; for if you thought it doubtful or
erroneous, you must have opposed the definition on
that ground. By not venturing to assail its truth, you
deprive your objection to its opportuneness of all
weight, for when was ever a religious truth, on which
eternal salvation depends, suppressed on such a ground
as this? Does this holding back, inspired merely by fear
of men, correspond to the ancient spirit and lofty mission
of the Church? How many of her doctrines would she
have dared to proclaim if she had chosen to wait on the
approval of the age? Rather, for that very reason, must
religious truths be loudly and emphatically proclaimed,
when a contrary opinion is growing among men, because
thereby an insidious heresy is marked out and
judged by the supreme authority in the Church. Your
plea of inopportuneness is therefore a fresh and urgent
ground for adhering firmly to the solemn definition of
Infallibility by the Council.</q>
</p>

<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>

<p>
How far better then would it be if these Prelates
were to declare simply and directly, what the German
Bishops have indeed said in their Pastoral, but, of
course, in general terms only, and without express
mention of the Infallibilist hypothesis; <q>This doctrine
possesses none of the requisite conditions of an article
of faith; it has no guarantee either of Scripture or
Tradition, and no roots in the conscience and religious
mind of the Christian world.</q> Such a line would be
incomparably worthier of the Bishops, and would make
their position far stronger and more unassailable. Instead
of letting themselves, as is intended, be yoked, like
willing prisoners, to the triumphal chariot of the sole
infallible and sole defining Pope and lord, they
would be making a beginning for the revendication of
their ancient apostolical rights, which the Papacy has
sequestered or robbed them of. They would be asserting,
by implication, that the Papacy and the Church
are not identical, and therefore that the Church cannot
be made responsible for all decrees and actions of the
Popes. Half-and-half courses, and false piety, in the
tremendous crisis the Catholic Church is now entering
upon, are not only powerless but fatal. And this half-heartedness,
which looks only too like fear, will make
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
the Ultramontane and Jesuit party all the bolder and
stronger in their plans. And they continue still as
firm as the rock of Peter. In the number for Oct. 2,
p. 64, the Civiltà maintains, against a new French
paper, the <hi rend='italic'>Avenir Catholique</hi>, that the relation of
the Bishops assembled in Council to the Pope is
simply one of most absolute subjection and obedience
to Papal commands, and declares, on the authority
of Ferraris, who is a classical authority at
Rome, what is meant by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præsidentia auctoritativa</foreign>, viz.,
the Pope's right, not only to decide on everything, but
to coerce all opponents, by ecclesiastical censures&mdash;excommunication,
suspension, and deposition&mdash;and other
judicial means.<note place='foot'><q>Præsidentia auctoritativa dicitur ... insuper cum auctoritate
coactivâ compescendi etiam per censuras ecclesiasticas, et alia juris media
contradictores et rebelles et contumaces, prout ex constitutione <hi rend='smallcaps'>xi.</hi> Martini
<hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, etc.</q></note> If the Pope strikes down every contradiction
or refusal of a Bishop at once, with the thunderbolt
of his anathemas, according to the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> he no
more violates the freedom belonging to the Fathers of
the Council, than a man who keeps within his own
rights in his dealings violates his neighbour's rights of
property. We must remember, as to this definition of
freedom, that the logic of the Jesuits has always gone
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
its own way without troubling itself with the logic of
the rest of mankind.
</p>

<p>
It deserves notice, however, that two months before
the opening of the Council the Jesuits had traced out
for the Bishops the extent and nature of the freedom
they are to enjoy there. They do their part frankly
enough in dispelling any illusion on the subject. If
any complaint from the Bishops should be heard in Rome,
such as was made by the Spanish and French Bishops at
Trent, the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> can reply that they were told all this
beforehand. The <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> has the most direct sources of
information, and may therefore be safely trusted when it
says, in a recent number, <q>We are not the authors of the
Papal thoughts, nor does Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> speak and act under
our inspiration, but <emph>we are certainly the faithful echo of
the Holy See</emph>.</q> And, as an echo of the Pope, the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà,</hi>
in its last number, p. 182, gives a more precise explanation
or statement of the infallibility of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign>
decisions, as extending, not only to all dogmas, but to
<q>all truths and doctrines connected with the various
kinds of revealed dogmas, and so to all sentences and
decrees concerning the common weal of the Church,
her rights and discipline.</q> In truth, if the Bishops don't
even yet see the precipice to the edge of which they have
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
been led step by step for years, and which they are just
going to spring into, that is no fault of the Roman
Jesuits, who have honestly done what they could to
open their eyes. It is therefore to be earnestly wished
that the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> may be read and well weighed as
widely as possible, for then one may hope they will
be <q>forewarned, forearmed.</q> They have certainly had
no lack of signs and warning voices, who are expected
and are willing to subscribe the intended decrees of the
Council. <q>The true echo of the Holy See</q> proclaims to
the world that every Pope is, ever has been, and ever
will be infallible, <emph>first</emph>, when he teaches or maintains anything
in any way connected with revealed truths of faith
or morals; <emph>secondly</emph>, when he decrees anything affecting
the welfare, rights, or discipline of the Church. Clearly
therefore, henceforth the question will be, not in what
cases the Pope is infallible, but what are the few cases
where he is not infallible. He, as being infallible, will
have the first and only right to determine what is the
welfare of the Church, and what it requires. And since,
in the whole range of public life, of politics and science,
there is scarcely anything not permanently or incidentally
connected with the weal of the Church, and with its real
or assumed rights and discipline, he will have it in his
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
power to make every secular question a Church question.
For it must certainly be anathematized as an error,
as the Syllabus says, to affirm that the Pope has exceeded
the limits of his power. How can he possibly do so on
this theory? He is infallible alike in the definition of
doctrine and in its application to concrete cases. He is
therefore always right in every claim and every decision,
and whoever opposes him, or does not at once
unconditionally submit, is always wrong. Whatever
demand he makes of any State or Sovereign, whatever
law or constitution he abrogates, he must at once be
obeyed, for he acts for the good of the Church, and he, as
being infallible, can alone judge and settle what that is.
The episcopate and clergy must blindly submit to his
infallible guidance and serve dutifully under his banner,
when he proclaims war against a State, or an institution.
</p>

<p>
Need we explain in detail what painful conflicts with
their Governments and the Constitutions they have sworn
to, Bishops and clergy, nay all Catholics, might be precipitated
into on this system? What caused that lamentable
persecution and oppression of Catholics in Great
Britain, and their loss of civil privileges for centuries, but
Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>'s prohibiting their taking the oath of allegiance
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
to their Sovereigns? Although the oath contained nothing
against the religious conscience of Catholics, the
Pope condemned it because, identifying his own pretensions
with the interests of the Church, he thought it intolerable
that it denied the power of Popes to depose
kings, absolve subjects from their allegiance, and excite
revolt and treason against the Sovereign and the State.
It is a maxim of the Decretals that no oath against the
interests of the Church is binding.<note place='foot'><q>Juramentum contra utilitatem ecclesiasticam præstitum non tenet.</q>&mdash;Lib.
ii. tit. 24, c. 27; Sext. Lib. i. t. 2, c. 1.</note> But what is for
the benefit of the Church the infallible Pope determines.
How often have Popes identified their own political
interests with the good of the Church, and required
and occasioned the breach of oaths and treaties! Thus
Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> absolved John from his oath to observe
Magna Charta, on his consenting to receive back his
crown as a gift from him. When, in the fifteenth century,
Eugenius <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> was at war with Francis Sforza, and
the general Piccinino had promised not to attack him,
the Pope absolved him from his promise, because it
was prejudicial to the interests of the Papacy, and <q>a
treaty prejudicial to the Church is not binding.</q> Charles
<hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> and Francis <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>, in their treaty of Madrid, had stipulated
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
that neither should have his oath dispensed without
the consent of the other; but Pope Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi>
was the first to seduce the King to commit perjury, in
order that he might form an alliance with him against
the Emperor. So again did Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> release Henry <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
from his five years' truce with Charles <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, confirmed by
oath, in order to gain the King of France as an ally
against Spain.
</p>

<p>
The Jesuit theory of the infallible Pope and the
extent of his powers is in no way less extravagant than
that which deluded Agostino Trionfo into his deification
of the Pope under John <hi rend='smallcaps'>xxii.</hi><note place='foot'>Cf. <q>Janus,</q> p. 230.</note> Once admit the maxim
of the Syllabus, that the Popes have never exceeded the
just limits of their power, and it must obviously be their
right to dispose of crowns and peoples, property and
freedom, since they have in fact claimed and exercised
the right. Thus, for instance, Nicolas <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> did not at all
violate the common rights of men, but only made a proper
use of his own absolute authority, when he gave
full power to King Alfonso of Portugal, and his successors,
to subjugate unbelieving nations, appropriate their
territories and all their possessions, and reduce their
persons to perpetual slavery. Nor was Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
less justified in conferring on Ferdinand and Isabella of
Spain and their successors the newly discovered countries
of America, and then drawing the famous line from
north to south through the New World, and dividing it
between Spain and Portugal. It was to the authority
of the Pope, as the lord of all mankind, to whom all
men are subject, wherever born, and of whatever religion,
since God has subjected the whole earth to his
jurisdiction, and made him master of it, that the Spanish
conquerors appealed against the natives. On this plea
they treated all refusal to submit as rebellion, for which
they meant to take vengeance on the natives&mdash;as in fact
they did in the most horrible manner&mdash;by cruel wars,
confiscation of property, and slavery. Their lust of conquest,
with all the abominations they perpetrated, could
always be excused and justified by the remembrance
that they were only acting with the sanction of God's
earthly representative, and punishing the refusal to
recognise his legitimate dominion over the world.
</p>

<p>
In the article we have cited, the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> affirmed anew,
on the authority of the Minorite, Bonaventure of S.
Bernardino (<hi rend='italic'>Trattato della Chiesa</hi>), that the Pope can
dispose of the whole <q>Temporali</q> of kings and princes,
their authority and possessions, whenever, in his judgment,
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
the good of the Church requires it. The work
of a French writer, Maupied, gives the Fathers of the
Society of Jesus the desired opportunity of again commending
their <hi rend='italic'>Magna Charta</hi>&mdash;their favourite Bull,
<hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi>&mdash;as the completest exposition of the
relations of Church and State (p. 213): <q>Fall down on
your faces, and adore your lord and master in Rome,
who can after his pleasure depose you, deprive you of
your rights and bishoprics, and bid you draw or sheathe
the sword.</q> This is a compendium of the teaching the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> addresses to princes and magistrates. If Papal
Infallibility is defined by the Council as an article of
faith, the whole system is sanctioned, down to its extremest
consequences, and the Jesuits will not fail to
point to it as proving that their political doctrines also
are now approved.
</p>

<p>
Under such auspices does the Council open, when the
Bishops, according to the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>&mdash;<q>the faithful echo of
the Holy See,</q>&mdash;have only to say Yea and Amen to the
teachings and commands of their master. Never in
her whole history has the Church had a severer task
imposed upon her, or passed through a more perilous
and decisive crisis than the present. It is not only a
question of internal freedom; it is, above all, the question
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
whether she is to be involved in an endless war
with the political order and civilisation of the modern
world, or by keeping to the really religious sphere,
and thus guarding her rightful independence, is for the
future too to fulfil throughout the widest area her
blessed mission towards mankind. The Council, which
has to decide on this alternative, acquires a weight and
significance such as none had before it.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>First Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, December 1869.</hi>&mdash;The Council is opened. It
is, we may say, in full swing, and the situation has to
a certain degree revealed itself. Two great questions
are in every mind and on every tongue&mdash;<emph>first</emph>, <q>Wherein
will the freedom promised to the Council consist, and
how far will it extend?</q> and <emph>secondly</emph>, <q>Will Papal
Infallibility be erected into a dogma?</q>
</p>

<p>
As regards the freedom of the Council, the position
of the episcopate is in some respects better and in
others worse than at Trent three centuries ago. Then
the Italians had the most complete and undeniable
preponderance over the Spanish and French Prelates,
who were the only others that came into the reckoning
at all. The opposition of the latter could at best only
stop the passing of some particular decrees, but, generally
speaking, whatever the legates and their devoted
troop of Italian Prelates desired was carried, and as
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
they desired it. The numerical relations are entirely
changed now, and there is a far more comprehensive
representation of National Churches. The Italian
Bishops, even if unanimous among themselves, do not
form a third of the whole Synod. But what they have
lost in numbers is abundantly made up by the lion's
share the Papal Court seizes beforehand for itself, and
thereby for the Italian <foreign rend='italic'>prelatura</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The first step taken, and the regulations already made
by Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> for the present Council, prove that it is not
to follow the precedents of the ancient free Councils,
or even of the Tridentine. At Trent all decrees still
ran in the name of the Council. <q>The Œcumenical
Tridentine Synod, lawfully assembled in the Holy
Ghost, ordains and decrees, etc.,</q> is the heading of every
session and its decrees. Very different is to be the
arrangement at Rome. There has already been distributed
to the Bishops a <hi rend='italic'>Methodus in primâ Sessione
Concilii observanda</hi>, which prescribes thus: <q>The Pope
will hand over the decrees to the Secretary or another
Bishop to read, who reads them with the heading,
<q>Pius, Episcopus, servus servorum Dei, <emph>sacro approbante
Concilio</emph>, ad perpetuam rei memoriam.</q></q> After reading
them he asks the Cardinals and Bishops whether they
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
assent. If all say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>, the Pope declares the decrees
carried <q>nemine dissentiente.</q> If some answer, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non
placet</foreign>, he mentions the number, and adds, <q>Nosque,
sacro approbante Concilio, illa ita decernimus, statuimus
atque sancimus ut lecta sunt.</q> This is the formula
first introduced after Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi>'s time, when
the Papacy had climbed to its mediæval eminence.
The first to use it was Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, at the Roman
Synod of 1079.<note place='foot'>[The third Lateran Council.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> It stands in glaring contrast to the
practice of the ancient Synods for the first thousand
years of Church history, which drew up and promulgated
all their decisions freely, independently, and in
their own name. Here the Pope appears as the author
of the decrees, the one authoritative legislator, who out
of courtesy allows the Bishops to express their opinions,
but finally decides himself, in the plenitude of his
sovereign power, as seems good to him. In another
Papal document communicated to the Bishops it is
said still more emphatically, <q>Nos deinde supremam
nostram sententiam edicemus eamque nunciari et promulgari
mandabimus, hâc adhibitâ solemni formulâ,
Decreta modo lecta, etc.</q> Meanwhile one concession
has been made, which might possibly have some value:
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
the Pope has declared that, though the right of initiating
measures belongs entirely to himself, he is willing to
allow the Bishops to exercise it. This would give
them the opportunity of at least bringing forward for
discussion some of the worst evils&mdash;such as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, what
many of them feel to be the hateful nuisance of the
Index&mdash;and preparing remedies. But then it must be
borne in mind that on every question the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has at
its disposal a majority of Prelates, who are its own
creatures, and many of them in its pay. With the
help of this troop of devoted followers it can get rid of
every disagreeable proposal before it is even submitted
to discussion.
</p>

<p>
The Sessions of the Council are solemnities only held
for the formal promulgation of decrees already discussed
and passed; the real business is done in the previous
Congregations. Every Bishop who wants to speak
there is to give notice the day before, but those who
wish to speak without having given notice are not to
be prevented. A congregation of twenty-four members
is to be chosen by the Bishops from among themselves,
for the purpose of specially investigating subjects on
which differences of opinion have been expressed, and
reporting on them. At least nine-tenths of the Prelates
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
are condemned to silence simply from being unable
to speak Latin readily and coherently through want of
regular practice. And to this must be added the diversities
of pronunciation. It is impossible, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, that
Frenchmen or Italians should understand an Englishman's
Latin even for a minute.<note place='foot'>The Scotch pronounce Latin much as the Germans do.</note>
</p>

<p>
There will no doubt be some subjects on which the
Bishops may really speak and determine freely. But
the moment a question in any way affects the interests
and rights of the Roman <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, there is an end of their
freedom. For every Bishop has sworn not only to
maintain but constantly to increase all the rights of the
Pope, and it is notorious that at Rome, and in regular
intercourse with the Papal Congregations, one can take
no step without being reminded, directly or indirectly&mdash;by
courtly insinuation, or rudely and openly,&mdash;of
this oath, and the enormous extent of the obligations
incurred by it, which embrace the whole range of
ecclesiastical life. The Bishops then are so far free in
Council, that no Bishop who expresses an opinion
unpalatable to the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> is threatened with imprisonment
or bodily injury.<note place='foot'>[Even this must be taken with reserve.&mdash;Cf. <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> Those Bishops enjoy a larger
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
freedom who have the moral courage to incur the reproach
of perjury and the threat of Papal displeasure
and its consequences; who, knowing well that they can
only carry out the most indispensable rights and duties
of their office by virtue of Papal privileges and delegations&mdash;quinquennial
faculties and the like,&mdash;yet vote
simply according to their convictions.<note place='foot'>[Most of the rights originally inherent in the episcopate are now reserved
to the Pope, who only allows Bishops to exercise them during
good behaviour, by virtue of <q>faculties</q> renewed every five years. Cf.
<q>Janus,</q> p. 422, note.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> The only question
is how many Bishops will act thus.
</p>

<p>
The members of the Court of Rome vie with one
another in assurances that perfect freedom will be left
to the Bishops in the grand question of the proclamation
of the new dogma of Papal Infallibility. This is confidently
asserted by those Germans who are more deeply
initiated into the views of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, such as the
Jesuits Franzelin, Schrader, and Kleutgen. And above
all, Bishop Fessler, the Secretary of the Council and
favourite of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, who was the first among the
Bishops to declare that it was the main business of the
Council to formulate and proclaim the new dogma, takes
especial pains to convince the Bishops that the Pope
has no intention of bringing the subject before them
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
himself. He admits that the preparatory Commission
has discussed this most important and comprehensive
of all doctrines, and has almost unanimously decided it
to be both true and opportune; and that their reporter
has shown conclusively, that considering the boundless
devotion to Rome of the present episcopate (at least
the majority of them), no more favourable moment
could be chosen for enriching the Church with this
new and fundamental article of faith.
</p>

<p>
This is now their watchword. All the initiated
repeat it, and some episcopal optimists try to persuade
themselves and others that the danger is really
past, and the scheme abandoned for this time. But
the truth is this: the authorities know well enough
that the absolutists among the Bishops&mdash;all those who
hope to strengthen their dominion and extend it over
secular matters by means of Papal Infallibility&mdash;are
both numerous and organized, and only await the intimation
that the right moment has arrived to come forward
themselves with a motion powerfully supported.
To begin with the Germans, there is the Bishop of
Paderborn, whose Jesuit theologian, Roh, says that, precisely
because Papal Infallibility is called in question by
Bishops like Dupanloup and Maret, the Council must
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
define it, to make any repetition of this atrocity impossible
for the future. Then there are the Bishops of
Regensburg, Würzburg, St. Pölten, and Gratz, the
Belgian and English Prelates, and those of French
Switzerland, among whom Mermillod rivals Manning
in his fanatical zeal for the new dogma; the Spanish
Prelates&mdash;men selected for promotion by Queen Isabella
and the nuncio at Madrid, simply for their thorough-paced
ultramontanism&mdash;pure absolutists in Church and
State, who would gladly see the new dogma ready-made
at once, but have to be restrained for a while. To
these must be added such French Prelates as Plantier
of Nîmes, Pie of Poitiers, the Bishops of Laval and
Montauban, and others. One knows least of the votes
of the Italian and United States Bishops, who, like the
Irish, will probably be divided. In any case the Court
party can count on a considerable majority in favour of
the new dogma.
</p>

<p>
Of course the opposite party, who wish to stave it off,
is strong and numerous. To it belong the majority of
the German and Austrian, as well as the Bohemian and
Hungarian Prelates, and among the French, the Archbishops
of Paris, Rheims, and Avignon, the Bishops of
Marseilles, Grenoble, Orleans, Chalons, and many more.
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
And on the point of the time being inopportune for defining
the Infallibilist dogma, a portion of the <q>old
Papal guard,</q>&mdash;viz., the Italian Bishops&mdash;will join them,
not to speak of American and Irish Prelates.
</p>

<p>
But&mdash;and in this lies their weakness&mdash;they are only
held together by a very loose bond. The one point
they are agreed upon is that the promulgation of the
new dogma will cause great embarrassments to the
Church and to themselves personally, and involve them
in all sorts of conflicts. On the main question, whether
this substitution of an infallible man for an infallible
Church is true, and attested by Scripture and Tradition,
they are themselves divided. If the confidants of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> understand how to insert the wedge into this
split, and drive it home, they may perhaps contrive to
break up the whole Opposition, and carry through, by
an imposing and apparently almost unanimous vote,
this Alpha and Omega of ultramontanism, in which all
their wishes and hopes are concentrated. Meanwhile
no stone will be left unturned, and very various methods
will be applied, and arguments used, in working upon
different Bishops. The earnest desire of the Holy
Father will be urged on some soft-hearted Prelates;
they will be told that the only way the Council can
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
rejoice his heart amid his bitter trials, and brighten the
evening of his life, is by freely offering him that crown
of personal infallibility which former Popes have striven
for, but never obtained. To others it will be intimated
that the Council itself must look like a play with the
chief figure left out, or an abortion, if the Syllabus and
Infallibility are not made into dogmas, for there is no
other question important enough to justify collecting
500 Bishops from five quarters of the world. Those
who agree with the doctrine, but shrink for the present
from the unpleasant consequences it might entail upon
them, will be told, <q>Now, or perhaps never.</q> With freedom
of the press established everywhere, it will be impossible
much longer to keep the poison of historical criticism, so
especially rife in Germany, out of the theological schools
and seminaries, and so perhaps the next generation of
clergy will not believe so absolutely in Papal Infallibility
as the clergy in many countries do now, and then the new
dogma will come at an unseasonable time, and encounter
powerful opposition. Besides, it is best to lose no
time in putting the iron bar of the new dogma across
the way, for then all historical facts that witness against
Infallibility, all results of criticism and investigation,
all appeals to the forgeries and fictions which helped to
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
build up the edifice, are once for all got rid of and
destroyed, at least within the Church. No Catholic
will any longer venture to appeal to them, and if he is
an historical student, he will only be able to console
himself by saying, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Credo, quia absurdum</foreign>. The dogma
has triumphed over history, as Manning has so admirably
explained in his last Pastoral.
</p>

<p>
Their favourite argument is the common one about
increasing the strength and security of the coercive
power of the Church. The Bishops are told that the
personal infallibility of the Pope will make not only
him but them, his delegates and plenipotentiaries, much
more powerful, and that under its shadow they will rule
with a stronger hand, for resistance will, in most cases,
be blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, speaking through
the Pope and his chosen instruments. Who, for instance,
would any longer dare to defend a book condemned
by the Congregation of the Index, after it had
become infallible? On the other hand, the Bishops
have their scruples, and some of them may be heard
saying that this would be a poor consolation for losing
half their episcopal authority, and that it is hard to ask
them to degrade themselves, and renounce their former
dignity as the supreme tribunal of faith, by making the
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
Pope infallible. It might not be pleasant to return
home from the Council with the consciousness of having
themselves abdicated at Rome the best, and what has
hitherto been held in the Church the highest, part
of their authority, and burned it as a holocaust on the
altar of Papal autocracy. The <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> of a Papal courtier,
however convenient at Rome, has its dark side north of
the Alps.
</p>

<p>
Already many symptoms of uneasiness betray themselves.
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> said the other day to a German Prince
of the Church, who formerly gave his opinion against
the Immaculate Conception, and has now again pronounced
openly against the Infallibilist dogma, <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Ce dogme
de l'infaillibilité passera, comme l'autre, malgré vous</foreign>.
On the other hand, the <hi rend='italic'>Regolamento</hi> has excited great
discontent, for it unmistakeably indicates the design of
giving the Pope the decision, and making the Bishops
only consultors. Had the assembly been in some
degree prepared for it, and had time allowed them for
coming to an understanding, there would certainly have
been opposition to it. But the heads of the French episcopate
have only just come together, and no attempt even
has been made to bring the German and French Bishops
into communication with each other. And a feature of
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
Roman policy about the Council, now first introduced,
is not exactly calculated to promote confidence and a
happy expectation of the prosperous results of the
Synod. I mean the rigid secrecy. According to the
last directions, all, bishops and theologians, are to maintain
the strictest secrecy about everything, and the
preliminary labours, as is well known, had to be carried
on under the seal of secrecy of the Holy Office (the Inquisition).
Nothing was communicated to the Bishops
themselves, who came to Rome in complete ignorance
of what they were to vote about&mdash;a procedure without
any precedent in Church history. It really seems sometimes
as if the object was to turn the Church topsy-turvy,
and take pleasure in doing exactly the contrary
to what the Church of earlier ages did when nearer her
original foundation. Formerly the idea of a Council
was associated with the notion of the fullest publicity,
and the common participation of all the faithful; the
deliberations were conducted with open doors, and all
were admitted who wished to hear them,&mdash;for from the
beginning all secrecy was strange and unnatural to the
Church, which was distinguished from heathenism in the
very point of neither having nor tolerating any esoteric
doctrine or secret compact. But the Roman <foreign rend='italic'>prelatura</foreign>
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
too shares the Italian predilection for making mysteries,&mdash;as
evidenced in the number of secret societies in the
Peninsula,&mdash;and then the Jesuits of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, and their
French and German copyists, had so solemnly promised
that the Council would provide in its decrees a sure
and effective remedy for humanity, sorely diseased as
it is, and threatened with destruction. As yet we
have waited in vain for any intelligible intimation of
what this panacea is to be. Beyond Papal Infallibility
and the Syllabus, nothing has transpired. Were
the curtain to be drawn back at the beginning, and the
secret betrayed,&mdash;that the much lauded panacea is
only moonshine, and that the Council is not in a position
to prescribe any other medicine to the patient
named mankind than the usual and well-known remedies
of faith, hope, and charity&mdash;the discord, already
growing, would be still further increased. It is well
therefore to lay the finger on the lips.
</p>

<p>
Meantime the Pope has united the most thorough-paced
Infallibilists, Manning, Plantier of Nîmes, Pie of
Poitiers, Mermillod of Geneva, and Deschamps of Mechlin,
on a Committee said to be intrusted with the discussion
of very important questions. Manning appears
to be recognised as their leader by all the adherents of
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
the new dogma, and Mermillod strongly supports him.
Cardinal Pitra, the French Benedictine formerly intrusted
with a mission, which proved unsuccessful, to
the Archbishop of Rouen, Cardinal Bonnechose, has
lately tried the same plan with the German Bishops.
He began by describing the Bishop of Orleans as a
mischievous teacher of error, and was obliged to hear,
much to his surprise, that these German Bishops quite
agreed with Dupanloup, and the Hungarians with the
Germans. Thus all have taken their side, or will do
so in the next few days. All the Spanish, Belgian, and
English<note place='foot'>[This must be taken with some reserve, as will be seen further on.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> Bishops, the majority of the Italians, and a
considerable number of the French, have ranged themselves
under the banner of the new dogma. They all
declare that it must now be decreed that every one,
without exception, must inwardly believe and outwardly
confess Papal Infallibility on pain of damnation;
and all the more so, since Pius himself has now
abandoned the reserved attitude he had maintained up
to this time in presence of the diplomatists, and openly
proclaims, that, being himself profoundly convinced of
his own infallibility, he neither can nor will tolerate
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
any further doubt about it in others. And thus the
influence of this party is very powerful, and already
preponderates; the whole mechanism of the Council,
the order of business, the <emph>personnel</emph> of its officers, in
short everything, is substantially in their hands, or
will be placed at their disposal. All preparations were
made in their interest, and all alternatives were foreseen.
That great ecclesiastical polypus, with its thousand
feelers and arms, the Jesuit Order, works for it
under the earth and on the earth; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Mea res agitur</foreign> is its
watchword.
</p>

<p>
On the other side, ready for the contest, and resolved
at least to show fight, stand the German, Bohemian, and
Hungarian Bishops,&mdash;with the exception, of course, of
Martin, Senestrey, Fessler, and some others&mdash;and all
among the French, American, and Irish Bishops who possess
any culture and knowledge. These men still hope
to see a portion of the Oriental Bishops&mdash;the real ones,
not the mere Italian so-called Vicars-Apostolic&mdash;join
their side, and there is indeed a very general anxiety as
to what position the Orientals, especially the Armenians,
will take up in reference to the great questions at issue.
They would all like to keep the Church free from the
millstone of the new dogma intended to be hung about
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
her neck, though very few even among them have a
clear perception of the momentous consequences it would
entail, in science and literature, in politics, and in the
relations of the Catholic Church to other Churches.
But the whole party has wind and sun against it, and
has to join battle in the most unfavourable position, on
slippery soil, and confined to acting on the defensive
under the greatest difficulties. The Infallibilists,
from the nature of the case, are far clearer and
better agreed, both as to end and means, than their
adversaries, many of whom do not conceal their predilection
for the dogma, though they tremble at the consequences
of it. Moreover, many of them will allow
themselves to be gained over before long, whether
through devotion to Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, or by the threats and enticements
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> knows so well how to apply, and for
which it possesses an inexhaustible treasury to choose
from. There is, for instance, the honorary title granted
by Rome to about 250 Bishops, <hi rend='italic'>solio Pontificio assistens</hi>,
which seems to the short-sighted only fit for lackeys,
but is in fact greatly sought after, and will be most
graciously accorded to those who unconditionally surrender
themselves. And then there are those manifold
concessions out of the rich store of Papal reserved
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
rights, special benedictions, and the like, so that there
are always nine out of every ten Bishops who want one
at least of these privileges.
</p>

<p>
We may readily conceive the excitement in the Jesuit
camp. After the patient, indefatigable toil of years of
seed-time, the harvest-time seems to them to be come at
last. Up to 1773, their Order, from its numbers, the cultivation
of its members, the influence of its schools and
educational establishments, and its compact organization,
was unquestionably the most powerful religious corporation,
but at the same time was limited and held in check by
the influence and powerful position of the other Orders.
Augustinians, Carmelites, Minorites, and, above all,
Dominicans, were likewise strong, and, moreover,
leagued together for harmonious action through their
common hatred of the Jesuits, or through the natural
desire to escape being mastered by them. Dominicans
and Augustinians possessed by long prescription the
most influential offices in Rome, so much so indeed that
the two Congregations of the Index and the Holy Office
were entirely in the hands of the Order of Preachers, to
the exclusion of the Jesuits. Since the restoration of
the Jesuits this is completely changed, and entirely in
their interest. All the ancient Orders are now in
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
decline, above all, in theological importance and influence;
they do but vegetate now. Moreover, the Dominicans
have been saddled with a General thoroughly
devoted to the Jesuits, Jandel, a Frenchman, who is
exerting himself to root out in his Order the Thomist
doctrines, so unpalatable to the Jesuits. The youngest
of the great Orders, the Redemptorists or Liguorians,
act&mdash;sometimes willingly, sometimes unwillingly&mdash;as
the serving brothers, road-makers, and labourers for the
Jesuits. And hence, now that they enjoy the special
favour of the Pope, they have come to acquire a power
in Rome which may be called quite unexampled. They
have, in fact, become already the legislators and trusted
counsellors of the Pope, who sees with their eyes and
hears with their ears. To those familiar with the state
of things at Rome, it is enough to name Piccirillo. For
years past they have implanted and fostered in the mind
of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> the views he now wants to have consecrated
into dogmas, and have managed to set aside, and at last
reduce to impotence, the influence of wise men, who
take a sober view of the condition of the times. When
the Dominican Cardinal Guidi, who was then the most
distinguished theologian in Rome, freely expressed to
the Pope his views about the projected Council and the
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
measures to be brought before it, from that hour he was
not only allowed no audience of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, but was excluded
from all share in the preparatory labours of the
Council, so that he remained in entire ignorance of the
matters to be laid before it. But the Jesuits are also
the oracles of many Cardinals, whose votes and opinions
are very often ready-made for them in the Gesu. The
Congregation of the Index, which they used formerly so
often to attack, blame, and accuse of partiality, when
their own works were censured by it, is now becoming
more and more their own domain, though the chief
places are still in the hands of the Dominicans; and
this may gradually take place with most of the Congregations
in whose hands is centralized the guidance and
administration of Church affairs in all countries.
</p>

<p>
And thus, if Papal Infallibility becomes a dogma,
what inevitably awaits us is, that this Infallibility will
not merely be worked in certain cases by the counsel
and direction of the Jesuits; much more than that.
The Jesuits will for the future be the regular stewards
of this treasure, and architects of the new dogmas we
have to expect. They will stamp the dogmatic coinage
and put it into circulation. It is enough to know the
earlier history of the Society to know what this means,
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
and what an immense capital of power and influence it
will place at their command. <q>Rulers and subjects</q>&mdash;that
will henceforth be the relation between the
Jesuits and the theologians of other Orders. Worst
of all will be the position of theologians and teachers
who belong to no Order. At the mercy of the
most contradictory judgments, as is already, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the
case in France, constantly exposed to the displeasure
of the Jesuits, of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and of their Bishop or
his adviser, and daily threatened in their very existence,
how are they to get spirit, perseverance, or
zeal for earnest studies, deep researches, and literary
activity? Every Jesuit, looking down from the impregnable
height of his privileged position, will be able to
cry out to the theologians of the secular clergy, <q>Tu
longe sequere et vestigia prorsus adora;</q> for now is
that fulfilled which the Belgian Jesuits demanded 230
years ago in their <hi rend='italic'>Imago Societatis Jesu</hi>. Their Order is
now really, and in the fullest sense, the Urim and
Thummim and breastplate of the High Priest&mdash;the Pope&mdash;who
can only then issue an oracular utterance when
he has consulted his breastplate, the Jesuit Order.<note place='foot'><q>Obligatam hærentemque sanctiori Pontifici velut in pectore Societatem.</q>&mdash;Bolland,
<hi rend='italic'>Imago</hi>, p. 622.</note>
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
Only one thing was still wanting for the salvation of a
world redeemed and regenerated once again: the
Jesuits must again become the confessors of monarchs
restored to absolute power.
</p>

<p>
It is one of the notes of an age so rich in contradictions
that the present General of the Order, Father
Beckx, is not in harmony with the proceedings of his
spiritual militia. Here, in Rome, he is reported to have
said, <q>In order to recover two fractions of the States of
the Church, they are pricking on to a war against the
world&mdash;but they will lose all.</q> But for that reason, as
is known, he possesses only the outward semblance of
Government, while it is really in the hands of a conference.
With this the fact seems to be connected that he
has appointed for his theologian at the Council the most
learned and liberal-minded man of his Order, Father de
Buck&mdash;a man whose views stand in much the same relation
to those of his fellow-Jesuits Perrone, Schrader,
and Curli, as the Bishop of Orleans's views to those of
the Archbishop of Westminster.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Second Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Dec. 18, 1869.</hi>&mdash;After the solemn receptions,
and the formal opening of the Council, visits, audiences,
and homages, the time for serious business has
arrived, and the Fathers have emerged from the dim
twilight of early synodical dawn into the clear daylight.
People have begun to get mutually acquainted,
and to question one another. The first chaotic condition
of an exceedingly mixed assemblage, some of whose
members scarcely understand one another, or not at all,
has been succeeded by a sort of division, through the
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>rapprochement</foreign> and closer combination of men of similar
views. As we related before, two great parties of very
unequal strength have organized themselves, and the
shibboleth which caused this division is the question
of Papal Infallibility, which is universally and consistently
taken to imply that whoever is resolved to
vote for this dogma is also ready to give his vote for all
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
the articles of the Syllabus, and generally for every
dogmatic proposition emanating from the Pope.
</p>

<p>
The Synod is unquestionably the most numerous
ever held; never in the early or mediæval Church
have 767 persons entitled to vote by their episcopal rank
been assembled. It is also the most various in its
national representation. Men look with wonder at the
number of missionary Bishops from Asia, Africa, and
Australia. If one considers the constant complaints
of want of funds in the missionary journals, the great
distance, the difficulty and expense of the journey, and
how much these men are wanted in the ill-organized
state of their dioceses, with so few priests, the question
occurs, Who bears the cost, and what means were
employed to rob so many millions for a long time of
their spiritual guides? Meanwhile most of the Bishops
are pupils of the Roman Propaganda, and obedient to
every hint of its will. And the more the new dogma
is combated, the more necessary is the imposing <emph>consensus</emph>
of five quarters of the world&mdash;of Negroes, Malays,
Chinese, and Hottentots, as well as Italians and
Spaniards.
</p>

<p>
More than two-thirds of the Council are either completely
agreed, or at least won over to the necessity of
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
making the personal infallibility of the last 256 Popes,
and their future successors, an article of faith now.
Since the original design of carrying it by simple acclamation
has been given up, Manning has renounced the
<foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> assigned to him of initiating it. But the Bishops
of the Spanish tongue on both sides the ocean&mdash;in
South America and the Philippine Isles&mdash;have declared,
in a meeting held in the apartments of their Cardinal,
Moreno, that they are ready to propose the dogma.
A Roman Cardinal said lately of Bishops of this sort,
<q>If the Pope ordered them to believe and teach four
instead of three Persons in the Trinity, they would
obey.</q>
</p>

<p>
The other party, opposed to the dogma, includes
towards 200 Bishops, and this is more than even the
most sanguine ventured to hope at first. To it belong
the majority of the German, Austrian, and Hungarian
Bishops, half the French, all the Portuguese, some
Irish, at least half the North American and Canadian,
and a considerable number of the Oriental. If the
votes were not only counted, but weighed according to
the intellectual standard of the voters, the 200 would
be far the majority. Among the German Bishops,
besides those already named, the two Tyrolese, Gasser
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
and Riccabona, Leonrod Bishop of Eichstadt, and the
Vicar of Luxembourg, belong to the Infallibilists. Ketteler
of Mayence, half won over by his hosts&mdash;he lives in
the German College<note place='foot'>[The German College is conducted by the Jesuits.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>&mdash;half succumbing himself, is said
to purpose deserting to the same camp. He, as well
as Stahl, Leonrod, and Martin are hampered awkwardly
by the Fulda Pastoral, which they subscribed, but when
once the knot is loosened or cut, they have only to
bring their assent to the new dogma.
</p>

<p>
It is said in the ruling circles that an opposition of
40 Bishops and under is so small and insignificant in
so large a Council that no account need be taken of
it. This would be to give up the principle always
hitherto maintained, even at Trent, that no decision in
points of faith could be issued without the physical or
moral unanimity of the Council. But as the dogma in
question is one which for the future will make all
majorities and minorities of episcopal votes superfluous
and valueless, it may very well be that by anticipation,
or by virtue of an exception which is now to be made
into a rule, the minority should in this case be pronounced
non-existent and undeserving of any notice.
I hear other curialists say that, as soon as the Opposition
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
is reduced to 40, they, under a sense of their
impotence, will give up all resistance, and either quit
the field, or come over to the conquering side. And so
the present strength of the Opposition must be greatly
diminished, and this is being strenuously laboured at.
There are plenty of means for the purpose, and as long
as there are Bishops who think themselves fortunate if
they gain the title of <q>Domestic Prelate to the Pope,</q>
a gentle pressure or insinuation, the prospect of a privilege,
or a robe of distinguished colour, will produce the
desired effect on many. Such things act like those insects
which bore through the hardest wood. The episcopate
of course has still many men to show who are
inaccessible to threats or seduction. But we should like
to count up at the end of the Council how many have
passed unscathed through the fiery ordeal. Meanwhile
a confident certainty of victory prevails among the
majority. Manning said the other day to an acquaintance
of mine, <q>So sure as I stand here, the dogma of
Infallibility will be proclaimed,</q> and on the other hand,
one of the leading Bishops of the Opposition said lately,
<q>I came here with small hopes, and with a feeling of
oppression, but I have found everything worse than I
expected.</q> A German priest had been summoned to
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
Rome as theologian of his Order by the General, a
Spaniard. At first greeting him the General said that
the great end they were all bound to work for was to
come to an understanding on the dogma of Papal Infallibility.
And when the German professed an opposite
opinion, and handed him a work he had written in that
sense, the conclusion was soon arrived at: he was sent
home at once as useless, and even mischievous. When
he was taking leave of certain Bishops, one of them
said to him, <q>I should rejoice if any one recalled me or
sent me home; we Bishops have been ordered here to
the Council, without being told what we are to deliberate
upon, and now that I know it I would gladly turn
my back on the Council and on Rome.</q>
</p>

<p>
The 500 Infallibilists have good ground for their
confidence. It is but natural, to begin with, that they
should trust the magical power of those resources of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> they have themselves had experience of. And,
next, they are well aware of their excellent organization,
which has hitherto proved irresistible. They are
commanded from two centres acting in common, the
Gesù and the Propaganda. The Jesuit General, Beckx,
if by no means in harmony with the line taken by the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, which has been removed from his jurisdiction,
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
thinks and feels about the Infallibility question in strict
accordance with the doctrine and rules of his Order,
and knows how to hold fast the threads with the support
and counsel of his assistants. Not a few Bishops,
without knowing it themselves, get drawn and moved
round by these wires which meet in the Gesù. If they
cannot be commanded at once, they will be slowly but
surely led into the right road by a chaplain or secretary
or consultor devoted to the Order. The Propaganda,
as we said before, provides for all missionary Bishops,
and it again is inspired from the Gesù. The whole
machine works so accurately that lately, in the selecting
of a Commission, 450 voting papers contained the same
names. So admirably is the discipline managed that
many a Cabinet majority might envy this scarcely attainable
ideal of the Council.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Third Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Dec. 19, 1869.</hi>&mdash;Since I have been here, breathing
physically and morally the air of Rome, and have
heard some of the most prominent Infallibilists, I can
understand a good deal which was an enigma to me
when in Germany. The leading spirits of this party
believe in the advent of a new spiritual dispensation,
a period of the Holy Ghost, which is to depend on the
turning-point of this definition of Papal Infallibility.
Archbishop Manning declared some years ago, in a
speech received with enthusiastic applause by the
Roman dignitaries, <q>La Chiesa Cattolica di oggidí esce
tutta nuova del fianco del Vicario di Gesù Cristo.</q>
This reference to the formation of the woman from
Adam's rib is very suggestive, for Eve, by the Divine
ordinance, was to be subject to the man,&mdash;and it includes
the notion which I have met with in several quarters
here, that the proclamation of the new dogma will be
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
immediately followed by an outpouring of the Holy
Ghost, and a renewal of the Pentecostal miracle. There
will of course be this difference, that henceforth the
Bishops will no longer speak with tongues, like the
apostles and disciples on the day of Pentecost, but
only with the tongue of the Infallible Pope, and will
utter in this way the thoughts and words of the Holy
Ghost. Hence not the slightest effect is produced when
any one, say a German or Englishman, points to the
terrible intellectual stumbling-block that will thereby
be obtruded on the faithful, and the perplexity and inward
alienation of so many thousands, and those too the
higher and leading minds, which may be certainly foreseen.
The gain will far exceed the loss; numberless
Protestants and schismatics, attracted by the powerful
magnet of Papal Infallibility, and the power of the
Holy Ghost, hidden in Papal utterances, will stream
into the Church&mdash;that is the sort of vision hovering
before these men. And a man who believes in an age
of the Holy Ghost cares nothing for what is said of the
breach with the views and traditions of the ancient
Church involved in the new article of faith: he thinks
it quite in order that a new dogma should inaugurate a
new era. Compared with such fanaticism, the speech
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
of another Infallibilist leader, a Frenchman, at a public
dinner, sounds sober, though in its way it is no less
extravagant, when he assures us that the great connoisseur
and discoverer of subterranean Rome, the Cavaliere
de Rossi, has detected Papal Infallibility in the Catacombs,
and whoever wants to see and appreciate it
there, has only to descend into them.
</p>

<p>
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> finds that he can undertake what he likes
with a majority so absolutely devoted to him and
simply at his beck. The assurance, so often reiterated
not long ago, that nothing was meant to be decreed
which could disturb Governments or introduce conflicts
between Church and State, seems to be already forgotten
or held superfluous, and a number of Bishops, at a
general audience, heard, not without consternation, from
the mouth of the highest authority, the statement that
the Syllabus must be made dogmatic: it would be
better to yield in other points than give that up.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the Opposition grows visibly stronger, and
men like Darboy, Dupanloup, and MacHale, Archbishop
of Tuam,<note place='foot'>[Archbishop MacHale does not seem to have justified this anticipation.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> are not to be despised as leaders. They are
not content with getting rid of Infallibility and the
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
Syllabus, but strive for some freedom in the Council,
and here they find sympathy even among the Infallibilists.
For to have their hands so completely tied by
the Pope's regulations, has surpassed all, even the worst,
anticipations of the Bishops. That first gleam of hope,
excited by the announcement that the Bishops would
be allowed to propose motions, has speedily vanished.
For it has become clear that this was merely intended
to save the Pope from having to propose his own Infallibility
to the Council, and provide for the motion
emanating from the Bishops&mdash;according to the present
plan, the Spanish Bishops. The right of initiation is
rendered purely illusory by the fact that the Pope has
reserved to himself and the Commission he has named,
composed of the stanchest Infallibilists, the sanction
or rejection of every motion. To this must be added
the regulations for the order of business, and the naming
by the Pope of all the officials of the Council, as
well as the scrutators and presidents of Congregations
or Commissions. This is an act of arbitrary power, and
a gagging of the Council, far beyond anything attempted
even at Trent. Yet at Trent the want of freedom was
felt to be so great that for 300 years the Catholic world
has manifested no desire to repeat the experiment of a
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
Council. But what will be the impression made by
the present Council, where the order of business is so
managed as to make any serious discussion impossible?
The strongest expressions of discontent come from the
French Prelates, they feel how undignified, not to say
ridiculous, is the <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign> assigned to them,&mdash;of saying
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> to ready-made decrees&mdash;even more keenly than
the Germans, who are also greatly disgusted. Attempts
to protest against this oppressive code in the Congregation
were suppressed by the declaration of the President,
Cardinal de Luca, that the Pope had so ordained, and
no discussion could be allowed on the subject. He
would allow neither the courageous Bishop Strossmayer
nor Archbishop Darboy to say a word on these intolerable
restrictions. The whole scene made a profound
impression.
</p>

<p>
On December 14 the two parties measured their
strength and organization in electing the twenty-four
members for the Commission <hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi>, which is, of
course, the most important of all. The Liberals were
completely overmatched, and, notwithstanding their
200 votes, not indeed properly combined, failed to carry
one of their candidates. Neither Dupanloup nor
Hefele could be brought in. A list of names to be
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
voted for from the Propaganda was handed to every
trusted partisan; the Italians and Spaniards were also
furnished with one, and so all the Infallibilist leaders
appear on the list of the Committee, Manning and
Deschamps, Martin and Senestrey, Pie of Poitiers,
Reynier of Cambray, then some Italians, Spaniards, and
South Americans,&mdash;these therefore are the flower of
theological learning among the Bishops. One of these
men they must keep their eye fixed on, for he seems
called to take a place of supreme importance and honour
in this Council, and if all goes well, will certainly
be counted with the heroes of ancient Councils, Athanasius,
Cyril, and Augustine. This is Mgr. Cardoni,
Archbishop of Edessa, Secretary to the Congregation
for examining Bishops, Consultor of several other Congregations,
theologian of the Dataria, and President of
the Ecclesiastical Academy. Yet this man was not
long ago a very obscure personage, even in Rome, but
as First Consultor of the Preparatory Commission of
Dogmas, he composed the report or <hi rend='italic'>Votum</hi> of forty
pages on Papal Infallibility. This is now printed
and distributed, and serves as the basis for the discussion
on the subject to be introduced in Council. Cardoni
himself, as reporter, will discharge the necessary
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
offices of midwife at the birth of the new dogma; he
will have the last word if any doubts or objections are
raised, and then at least 500 votes will proclaim at
once the Infallibility of the Pope and the triumph of
the greatest and most fortunate of Roman theologians.
Cardoni will immediately be made Cardinal; as he brings
this Divine gift to the Pope, he will himself partake in
the enjoyment of what is so much indebted to him, and
will reap the harvest of his labours.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fourth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Dec. 20, 1869.</hi>&mdash;It may truly be said that
theology is now rare, very rare, in Rome. There is, of
course, no lack of theologians; the Pope himself has no
less than a hundred, chiefly monks; but if they were
all pounded together in a mortar into one theologian,
even this one would find some difficulty in getting his
claims recognised in Germany. If any one here were
to demand of the so-called theologians what, between
the North Sea and the Alps, is considered the first
requisite for a theologian,&mdash;the capacity of reading the
New Testament and the Greek Fathers and Councils in
the original language,&mdash;he would be ridiculed as a
dreamer. And as to the theology of many Bishops,
one is often reminded of the daughters of Phorcys, who
had only one eye and one tooth, which they lent each
other by turns to use. Not a few of them flutter about
Infallibility like flies about a candle, in evident fear of
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
getting burnt. But when the critical moment comes,
they will vote obediently as the master whose power they
have sworn to increase bids them. If the Prelates were
even slightly acquainted with Church history, they would
certainly recoil in terror from the maxims and doctrines
their decision will recall from the realm of shadows
they seem to have sunk into, and clothe again with flesh
and blood. They would recoil from the complications
and contests they and their successors must hereafter be
involved in with all nations and governments, as forced
executors of every infallible utterance of 256 Popes.
</p>

<p>
The sudden departure of Cardinal Mathieu, Archbishop
of Besançon, is connected with the election of
the Commission on Faith, which turned out so unfortunately
for the Germans; the French Bishops after the
previous consultation had divided their forces, the Infallibilists
voting for Bonnechose, their opponents for
Cardinal Mathieu. The defeated party wanted to protest
against a scandalous intrigue about the election,
carried on by a man whose name I suppress; and Mathieu's
sudden departure was in order to avoid being
mixed up with the conflict, and from disgust at the
whole affair.
</p>

<p>
A singular incident not long since created some
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
sensation and amusement in English circles. The
English Bishops, like their Archbishop, Manning, are
declared Infallibilists&mdash;a tendency first introduced
among the clergy there since Wiseman's time, for
before that Gallican views prevailed almost universally
in England, and definite assurances were given on
the subject at the time of Catholic Emancipation.
And as Papal Infallibility implied necessarily the
doctrine of the Pope's dominion over monarchs and
governments, which was formally abjured&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, in the
Irish clerical seminary of Maynooth&mdash;the Infallibilist
theory was supposed to be shelved also. It chanced that
lately the <hi rend='italic'>Pall Mall Gazette</hi>, which is much read even
here, under the heading, <q>The Infallibility of the Pope
a Protestant Invention,</q> quoted the following question
and answer from a widely-used manual of instruction,
approved by many Bishops, and highly praised even in
Manning's journal, the <hi rend='italic'>Tablet</hi>, called <hi rend='italic'>The Controversial
Catechism</hi>:&mdash;<q><hi rend='italic'>Q.</hi> Are not Catholics bound to believe
that the Pope is in himself infallible?&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A.</hi> This is a
Protestant invention, and is no article of Catholic
belief; no Papal decision can bind under pain of
heresy, unless received and prescribed by the teaching
body, the Bishops of the Church.</q>
</p>

<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>

<p>
At the moment I am writing, there is a pause, but
by no means a truce. <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Le Concile ne marche pas, mais il
intrigue</foreign>, I heard a Frenchman say this morning. The
acoustic qualities of the Assembly Hall, which is the
whole height of St. Peter's, make it quite unfit for use.
If anything is to be proclaimed, it must be shouted at
full pitch to the four sides. It happened the other
day that the Bishops on one side were crying <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>,
while those on the other side expressed their opinion by
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet, quia nihil intelleximus</foreign>. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, who was
long ago made aware of the state of the case, really
thought that all discussion was superfluous. And as the
hall must be abandoned as utterly useless, the 120,000
scudi lavished on preparing it are wasted. There is no
lack of funds, however; so much so, that 20,000 scudi
have been spent already on laying the foundation of
the memorial pillar of the Council. These things must
make an indescribable impression on those who have
heard most touching pictures drawn in the pulpit at
home of the wants and poverty of the Head of the
Church.
</p>

<p>
Antonelli, to whom the impossibility of carrying on
the Council in this place has been represented, has now
taken the matter in hand, and another chamber is to be
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
found and got ready. A room in the Quirinal is talked
of, or the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>atrium</foreign> over St. Peter's in the Sistine. The
latter would be an ominous place, for in the <hi rend='italic'>Sala
Regia</hi>, which the Bishops must pass through to enter
the Sistine, is Vasari's famous picture, painted by order
of Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiii.</hi>, for the glorification of the massacre of
St. Bartholomew. The contemplation of this picture,
which now, since the publication of the nuncio Salviati's
despatches, the Pope is proved to have ordered with
full knowledge of the real nature of that horrible
occurrence, and full intention of sanctioning it, might
perhaps somewhat indispose the Prelates to vote for the
articles of the Syllabus on religious coercion and the
power of the Church to inflict bodily punishment.
Antonelli means now to take up the Council in earnest.
For him, indeed, who was formerly an advocate, the
theological side of Infallibility has little interest; but
he is too skilful and experienced a statesman and
financier not to appreciate keenly the gain to be derived
from the new dogma in all countries, in the shape
of power, influence, and revenue. He understands well
enough, and better than many statesmen this side the
Alps, the incalculable consequences of having it henceforth
taught and insisted on as a first principle in
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
every catechism, public school, and country pulpit, that
Papal decrees and decisions, not only in the domain of
faith but of morals, the relations of Church and State,
and the whole life of society, are absolutely infallible,&mdash;of
its being made the first and crucial question for
Catholics in all cases, What has the infallible Pope,
either the reigning pontiff or one of his predecessors,
decided on this point, or what will he decide if
asked?
</p>

<p>
A Bull appeared yesterday, which, if read and understood,
would create great excitement. It professes to
abolish a part of the numerous excommunications <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>latæ
sententiæ</foreign>,<note place='foot'>Excommunications <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>latæ sententiæ</foreign>, as distinguished from excommunication
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ferendæ sententiæ</foreign>, are those which immediately take effect on the
commission of the forbidden act, without requiring any sentence of Pope
or Bishop to be pronounced.</note> which the Popes have gradually accumulated;
but virtually it is intended as a renewal or confirmation
of the Bull <hi rend='italic'>In Cœnâ Domini</hi>, which Clement
<hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi> (Ganganelli) first dropped the custom of publishing
annually, and which, from his time, had been
regarded, everywhere out of Rome, as abrogated, though
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> always maintained that it was binding in
principle, as Crétineau-Joli shows in his Memoirs of
Consalvi. I am only giving here the judgment of a
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
friend who has read the Bull. If he is rightly informed,
it is but the first link in a chain of decrees embodying
the retrospective force of the anticipated dogma,
for the saying will hold good then, <q>Quod fuimus erimus,
quod fecimus faciemus.</q> Every claim once advanced
must be maintained, every doctrinal proposition
renewed, and so the living body will be chained to a
corpse.
</p>

<p>
Desertions from the ranks of the Opposition to the
majority of 500, must, no doubt, be reckoned on, and
the renegades will say, like Talleyrand, that they are
not deserting, but only coming in earlier than others.
Whether these desertions will be numerous enough to
reduce the minority to 40 or 50, as the authorities
hope, will be determined when the question of opportuneness
gets disentangled from the question of principle.
For it requires more than common courage to
make open profession of disbelief in the Infallibilist
dogma at Rome, since the Pope, in his letters to Manning
and Deschamps, has indulged in severe censures
of those who question his infallibility; and every
Cardinal and Monsignore is accustomed to express
himself in the same sense.
</p>

<p>
Can this Council, then, which can move neither hand
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
nor foot, be called free? Is an assembly free, when
no speech can be made, no single decision come to,
without the express permission of an external master?
If this is freedom, there has never been an unfree
Council. So I hear many saying, as well clergy as
laity, and even Bishops. The Pope, of course, has not
forgotten that, on the day of his election, sitting on the
High Altar of that very church where the Council is
now being held, he was adored by the Cardinals, and
four days afterwards crowned with the triple tiara, with
the words, <q>Scias te esse rectorem orbis.</q> It has been
summoned to arrange and negotiate the transition from
the previous condition of the Church to a new one.
Till now, at least in theory, Councils were, or were
supposed to be, assemblies deliberating and deciding
freely. But, in the new condition of the Church, under
the rule of Papal Infallibility, assemblies of Bishops
are purely superfluous, or only useful as machines for
acclamation. The present assembly stands midway
between the old Church and the new, and participates
in both. The vital breath of freedom and independence
it is deprived of, but it is not yet a mere acclamation-machine:
it can still dissent and say, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>. On
the day when the new dogma is proclaimed, and the
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
eternal city again, as in 1517,<note place='foot'>When the news arrived from Paris of the abolition of the Pragmatic
Sanction, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of the reforms of Basle.</note> declares its joy by
illuminations, the Synod will have killed itself with its
own hand, and marched into the grave as the last
of its generation. And just as when a knight died
the last of his race, his shield was broken and his arms
obliterated, so will the usual chapter <hi rend='italic'>De Conciliis</hi> be
obliterated from the dogmatic manuals.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Dec. 23, 1869.</hi>&mdash;The Council is suspended for
a while, for want of an available place of meeting, or is
occupied only in studying the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> that have been
distributed at home, and deliberating in different sections.
The German Bishops have resolved to address a
memorial to the Pope, protesting against being put into
a strait-waistcoat by the regulations for the order of
business, and claiming the right of proposing motions
freely. They think it intolerable that every proposal,
wish, or motion should have first to be examined, revised,
and mutilated or changed at their pleasure by two
Commissions, before it can even come on for discussion.
And how are these two Commissions composed? Of
course, the eight German Bishops who have already
separated themselves from their countrymen, and prefer
to associate with Spaniards and South Americans, hold
aloof from this proceeding too. If I am correctly informed,
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
a similar memorial has been handed in from
the French Bishops; it was, at least, being circulated
for signature during the last few days.
</p>

<p>
You will have received, or found in the French and
English papers, the Bull of Excommunications I mentioned
in my last. As I said before, it is a re-issue of
the Bull <hi rend='italic'>In Cænâ Domini</hi>. Certain excommunications
nobody paid any attention to are dropped out, as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
of sovereigns and governments who levy taxes without
permission of the Pope. But new censures of wide
application have come into their place. In reading
the Bull, one feels as if one had got into the thick of a
tempest, so fierce and frequent are the lightning-flashes
of the Vatican ban, darting and burning in all directions.
If they were to be treated seriously, there
would not be many houses in the cities of Europe that
would not be struck. The Bishops are hit hard; one
unpleasant surprise follows on another. While they are
considering how to secure a minimum of freedom in
the Council, they are suddenly overwhelmed with a hailstorm
of excommunications, many of which are directly
aimed at themselves, but all of which are to be administered
and executed by them and their clergy.
They are summoned to Rome, and hardly have they got
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
there when this Bull of anathemas, drawn up without
their knowledge or participation, and which thrusts the
souls intrusted to them by thousands out of the
Church, is sent to them; and the whole burden of it,
with all its endless consequences and complications, is
laid on their shoulders. They seem intended to drain
the cup of humiliation to the dregs. The only persons
pleased with the Bull, as far as I can see, are the
Jesuits, who are in the very best spirits here in Rome,
and see both present and future in the most rosy hues.
The view of the pious Bishops is simple and unanimous:
the more excommunications, so many more reserved
cases and perplexed and tormented consciences.
But the confessionals of the Jesuits will be doubly
thronged, who are furnished with all sorts of plenary
powers of absolution, and are thus made indispensable,
and placed in a very superior position to the secular
clergy. Moreover, the Bishops are deprived of the
power of absolving from these censures. So each of
these multiplied excommunications is worth its weight
in gold to the Order, and helps to build Colleges and
Professed Houses.
</p>

<p>
The Bull containing directions in the event of the
Pope's death occurring during the Council was not
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
issued by Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> from any real anxiety to provide
for such an occurrence,&mdash;for he enjoys the best health,
and in all probability will falsify the old proverb, <q>Non
numerabis annos Petri.</q><note place='foot'>[This formula, often mistakenly supposed to occur in the Papal
Coronation service, refers to the traditional length of St. Peter's pontificate&mdash;twenty-five
years. No Pope has yet reigned to the end of his twenty-fifth
year, and only one has entered on the beginning of it. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> completes
his twenty-fourth year on June 16, 1870.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> No one really supposed the
Council would claim the right of electing in Conclave,
as occurred once under totally different circumstances,
after the deposition of a Pope (John <hi rend='smallcaps'>xxiii.</hi>) at Constance.
The real point of the document lies in the
declaration that the Council is to be at once dissolved
on the Pope's death, as a corpse from which the soul
has departed. And this is a decisive intimation of the
relations not only of the dead but of the living Pope to
the Council. The Bull might be summed up in the
words, <q>Without me you are nothing, and against me
and my will you can do nothing.</q>
</p>

<p>
The opposition of German and French Bishops to the
new dogma was more or less anticipated here; what
was not expected was that the Orientals, numbering
about sixty, and the North American Bishops, would
pronounce against it. The former declare openly that
no surer means could be found to throw back their
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
Churches into schism, and place them under the holy
Synod in St. Petersburg or the Patriarch in Stamboul.
The Americans ask how they are to live under the free
Constitutions of their Republic, and maintain their position
of equality with their (Protestant) fellow-citizens,
after committing themselves to the principles attested
by Papal Infallibility, such as religious persecution and
the coercive power of the Church, the claim of Catholicism
to exclusive mastery in the State, the Pope's
right to dispense from oaths, the subjection of the civil
power to his supreme dominion, etc. The inevitable
result would be that Catholics would be looked upon
and treated as pariahs in the United States, that all
religious parties would be banded together against them
as common enemies, and would endeavour, as far as
possible, to exclude them from public offices. One of
the American Bishops lately said, <q>Nobody should be
elected Pope who has not lived three years in the
United States, and thus learnt to comprehend what is
possible at this day in a freely governed Commonwealth.</q>
</p>

<p>
But even in the apparently compact and admirably
organized mass of the 500 Infallibilists, softly whispered
doubts are beginning to be heard here and there.
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
Before the eyes of some of these devoted Prelates
hovers a pale and warning ghost, called exclusion of the
clergy and of Catholic instruction from the public
schools. It would indeed be impossible to put more
effective weapons into the hands of the powerful and
increasing party who are aiming at this, than by giving
its due prominence henceforth in all Catechisms to the
supreme article of faith of Papal Infallibility, with some
of its consequences expressed, and others left to be
orally supplied by the teacher, so that boys and girls
would be trained in full knowledge of the glaring contradiction
between religion and the order of the State,
the Church and the Constitution of their country.<note place='foot'>[This point is forcibly dwelt on by Count Daru in his memorandum,
which the Pope refused to lay before the Council.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> A
Belgian layman here assured me yesterday that the
result of the new dogma in his country would be a
powerful movement against the position of the clergy
in the primary schools; the gymnasia and middle
schools they have lost already. One of the Belgian
Bishops even is said to begin to be troubled with these
apprehensions. And now a cry of distress is rising
from England. The National Education League has
published its programme for a system of compulsory
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
education of the people, excluding all denominational
teaching, and only allowing the Bible for religious
reading. The English Bishops now in Rome, who are
fanatical for the new dogma, may ask themselves if on
their return home they could make a more acceptable
present to the Committee of this already very powerful
League than by issuing a corrected Catechism, enriched
with the new article of faith. A penny edition of it
would bring in hundreds of thousands of members to
the League, and admirably further the design it now
openly proclaims of <q>absorbing in a friendly way</q> the
schools already existing.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Dec. 24, 1869.</hi>&mdash;The first part of a tolerably
comprehensive document, or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, has been distributed,
it is said, to the Bishops, <q>sub secreto pontificio,</q>
and no less than seventeen parts equally comprehensive
are to follow. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> of a dogmatic constitution
<hi rend='italic'>contra multiplices errores ex Rationalismo derivatos Patrum
examini propositum</hi> is a sort of doctrinal compendium,
divided into chapters, and, as is easily seen,
is only an amplification of the opening propositions of
the Syllabus. In this way we shall have the unprecedented
occurrence of a Papal decree, extending to the
length of a book, issued with the approval of the Council.
If it is received and promulgated in this shape, it
will create astonishment by its wholly unconciliar form.
It is thrown into a declamatory shape; it indulges in
complaints and reproaches about the blindness and
misery of men, who have fallen into so many deadly
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
errors, even materialism and pantheism; it carries on its
front the impress of the new Jesuit school, and seems to be
inspired by the aim of bringing before the contemporary
world, in their crudest form, all the hardest and most
offensive principles of particular doctrinal schools, which
it has hitherto been endeavoured to soften or set aside.
For the originator of this tractate assures us that the
aversion of men for such doctrines is only one of the
poisonous fruits of Rationalism. Here is a characteristic
specimen. At that Florentine Synod of 1439,
which bequeathed such painful recollections both to East
and West, Eugenius <hi rend='smallcaps'>IV.</hi> had it defined <q>that the souls
of those who die only in original, or in actual mortal
sin, descend into hell, but are unequally punished.</q><note place='foot'><q>Animas eorum qui in solo peccato originali, vel mortali actuali
decedunt, in infernum descendere, pœnis tamen disparibus puniendas.</q></note>
This proposition has sadly tormented theologians, and
they have devised all sorts of ways of softening or explaining
it, even assuming the very doubtful authority of
this Council, which was rejected by the whole Gallican
Church. For even the most resolute faith recoils in
horror from the logical inference, that God has created
the human race in order from generation to generation
to plunge into hell far the larger portion of mankind,
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
simply because they have not received the baptism
which in most cases was never offered them. The vast
gulf between this proposition and the Scriptural doctrine
that God is Love, and wills all men to be saved,
no theologian has undertaken to bridge over. But the
Roman Jesuit to whom we owe this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> really thinks
these are just the doctrines best adapted to cure men
of this age of the fatal Rationalism they have fallen
into.<note place='foot'><q>Imprimis itaque fide Catholicâ, tenendum est illorum animas,</q> etc.
The author seems really to believe that the Rationalistic tendencies of the
age can be cured with an emetic.</note> This reminds one strongly of Antonelli's saying,
that these Fathers have a special talent for ruining
whatever they touch.
</p>

<p>
The death of Cardinal Reisach is considered here an
irreparable loss, and above all by the Pope himself,
whose confidence he enjoyed more than any other
Cardinal. He had the greatest share in preparing the
propositions laid before the Council, and had he been
able to make his influence felt, he would certainly have
given powerful support to the new dogmas. He passed
here for a man of comprehensive learning and great
penetration. His friends used to commend his friendly
and genial nature. For us Germans he was a sort of
phenomenon, a show specimen of his kind, so to speak.
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
In him we saw how far a German can go in the process
of being Italianized, so radically was his whole being
metamorphosed into that of the Italian <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>prelatura</foreign>, and
the peculiar circle of thought in which Roman clerics
and dignitaries move had become a second nature to
him. What distinguishes a Roman Prelate is, first, that
liturgical endowment&mdash;that willing absorption in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cæremonia</foreign>, as the old Romans partly originated and partly
borrowed it from the Etruscans&mdash;and next, the faculty
of calculating quickly and surely what loss or gain in
power and influence the settlement of any ecclesiastical
question will bring. Reisach was eminent in both respects.
No one excelled him in reverence for every line of
the rubric and every ceremonial detail, as practised here.
And again, in his dislike for German science, literature,
and theology, he had become a thorough Italian,
so that his ignorance of even the most famous intellectual
products of Germany was quite fabulous. To
him principally were addressed the denunciations of
German works not composed exactly to the taste of the
Roman Jesuits, and it was he who arranged with the
Congregation of the Index the censures pronounced
during recent years on the works of learned Germans.
</p>

<p>
Thus then there is a niche left vacant in the Roman
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
temple of heroes. Another Reisach will not so easily
be found; for it is given to very few men to transmute
their originally single nature into the form of the
Siamese twins, inhabited by two souls, a German and
an Italian.<note place='foot'>[Cardinal Reisach, who was formerly Archbishop of Munich, used to
say he had almost forgotten how to speak German.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> If the vacant Hat is not to be the price of
desertion from the ranks of the Opposition, but the
reward of past services, three German Bishops may put
in a claim for it, Martin, Senestrey, and Fessler. In
fiery zeal for the good cause, restless activity, and unquestioning
devotion, they are on a par, and were all
Germany like-minded with this trio, the great sacrifice&mdash;<q>il
sacrificio del intelletto</q>&mdash;so variously commended by
the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, would have long since been accomplished,
and the Jesuits might hold up the Germans as a model
for all nations to follow. Meanwhile for the moment
Fessler occupies the most conspicuous position.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Postscript.</hi>&mdash;I have just learnt that the Pope is not
disposed to give up his Council Hall in St. Peter's.
Another attempt to hold a General Congregation there
is to be made on Tuesday, which can hardly be a success.
The natural consequence will be that the second
Solemn Session, announced for January 6, will fall
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
through from lack of any decrees ready to promulgate.
The protest of a portion of the French Episcopate
against the order of business has really been sent in,
and this has inspired fresh courage into the German
and Hungarian prelates, who have drawn up a protest
against the innovations differing so widely from the
form of the ancient Councils; they dwell especially on
the violation of the right belonging by Divine institution
to the Bishops. I need not say that the notorious
eight&mdash;the Jesuit pupils and the Tyrolese Bishops&mdash;declined
to join in this proceeding. Meanwhile scruples
have arisen among the other pupils of the Jesuits, which
again bring the whole affair into doubt. There is a
notion among the French of dividing the Council into
assemblies, formed according to the different languages,
so as to get over the difficulty or impossibility of carrying
on a free discussion in Latin. But then it became
clear at once that, through the number of missionary
Bishops, and Swiss or Belgians of the Romance tongues,
the majority would be on the side of the Infallibilist
party. And the Pope, who hates all these assemblies of
Bishops, has interposed by causing a sort of standing
order to be proclaimed, through the curialistic Cardinal
Bonnechose, that he will allow no meetings of more
than twenty Bishops.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Seventh Letter.</head>

<p>
Cardinal Schwarzenberg has been the subject of
conversation in Rome for the last few days. He is said
to have formally gone over to the Infallibilist camp,
and the report will no doubt make the round of Europe.
But it is not true, and he himself declares, notwithstanding
appearances, that he has not changed, and does not
mean to change, his attitude and mind. The circumstance
which has given occasion to the rumour is as
follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
In a combined meeting of German and Hungarian
Bishops, it was resolved, on Haynald's motion, to request
of the Pope a better representation, and one more accordant
with the dignity of the two Churches, on the
Commissions. It was hoped that a majority of the
French and a considerable number of the North American
and Oriental Bishops, and even some Spanish
and Italian Prelates, would join in this step. For
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
Haynald's object was to propose that the whole assembly
should be divided into eight national groups,
and that each of these <q>eight nations</q> should be
entitled to have two or three members, elected from its
own body,&mdash;some sixteen or twenty-four in all&mdash;added
to the four elected Commissions, and to the Commission
nominated by the Pope for examining all motions proposed.
This, it was thought, would secure a counterpoise
to the skilfully disciplined majority which was
crushing out all opposition. For it has already become
evident that the strength of the Romanist party lies in
the number of titular Bishops selected by the Pope, and
Vicars-Apostolic or missionary Bishops; in persons,
that is, who, having no flocks, or only having them in
expectation, represent in fact nothing and nobody, and
can therefore bear no testimony to the faith of their
Churches, which have no existence. The Germans were
greatly elated by this project; they admired and congratulated
themselves on having shown so much spirit,
and daring to tell the Pope something widely different
from the assurance that they were ready to die in
absolute subjection to him. Hereupon Schwarzenberg
came forward to declare that he would not sign the
petition, as he did not choose to compromise himself
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
further with the Pope, and Rauscher of Vienna, and
Tarnóczy of Salzburg, sided with him. This caused great
consternation, and at the first moment many thought
it betokened an entire apostasy, and that in Schwarzenberg's
case the Cardinal had triumphed over the
German. But he has so emphatically denied this that
he must be believed. It is very conceivable that
Schwarzenberg, seeing more deeply into the situation at
Rome, was led by grounds of expediency to take this
course; possibly the mere wish to make as sparing
use as they could of the fund of high spirit and courage
brought from Germany, and the fear of using it up too
quickly, in case the Council should last some time, may
have determined the three Prelates to decline subscribing.
Already a new demand has been made upon
the Bishops, to adopt the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> the Pope had intrusted
the preparation of to the Jesuits.
</p>

<p>
The contest over this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> has begun in good earnest,
according to the impression made by the General
Congregation held yesterday, Dec. 28. The first part of
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was the one the speakers dwelt on,&mdash;as far,
that is, as they could be heard, for the acoustic uselessness
of the hall makes itself felt before and behind, and
the pulpit had to be carried about all round the room
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
before the right position could be hit upon for it.
Meanwhile it had transpired, who were the authors of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> which the Pope meant to promulgate, <q>with the
approbation of the Council,</q> as a binding rule of faith.
They were two German Jesuits, Schrader, and another,
either Franzelin or Kleutgen. It is remembered how,
a year ago, a great deal was made in the newspapers of
distinguished German scholars having been summoned
to Rome for the preliminary labours of the Council. If
several of the names mentioned created surprise from
their obscurity, it gave satisfaction to find among those
invited men like Hefele and Haneberg. It is now clear
that every work of real importance was intrusted to
other hands, chiefly to the Jesuits, while Hefele was
summoned to Rome to extract the ceremonial from the
Acts of the Council of Trent, after which he was dismissed,
and Haneberg was commissioned to prepare a
report on Eastern monasteries. Schrader has become
notorious as the advocate of the extremest Papal
system by his book <hi rend='italic'>De Unitate Romanâ Commentarius</hi>,
where he treats all episcopal authority as a mere
emanation of the Papal. According to him, every article
of the Syllabus is to be so understood that the contradictory
statement contains the true doctrine. It was
<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>
therefore with very good reason that he was chosen out
to draw up the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, or, in other words, to fabricate a
second strait-waistcoat for theology, after the Council
had already been put into one in the regulations for the
order of business.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> has aroused manifold displeasure, even
among allies of Schrader and his brethren, and men
who, like them, are Infallibilists. What I hear said
everywhere is that the whole thing is a poor and very
superficial piece of patchwork, with more words than
ideas, and, as the blind old Archbishop Tizzani said in
the Congregation, is above all designed to stamp the
opinions of the Jesuit school as dogmas, and to substitute
a string of new obligatory articles of faith for the
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>theologumena</foreign> or doctrines of the theological schools
hitherto left open to the judgment of individuals. For
a Society, like that of Loyola's disciples, it is of
supreme importance to possess in the multitude of new
anathemas what will always supply abundant matter
for accusations; it appertains to their <q>arcana dominationis</q>
always to keep alive the fear of being charged
with heresy. It makes other theologians dependent on
the Order, and cramps their literary energies. And it
must be borne in mind that there are no longer any
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
powerful theological corporations which might meet the
Jesuits on equal terms. Were the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> to be
adopted, very few professors of Old Testament Exegesis
could escape the charge of heresy, so far is the inspiration
of the scriptural books, even the deutero-canonical,
extended here for the first time.
</p>

<p>
And thus it happened yesterday that there was no
single speaker for the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, but all, beginning with Cardinal
Rauscher, spoke against it; and Archbishop Conolly
of Halifax said in so many words, <q>Censeo <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> cum
honore esse sepeliendum.</q> This of course has only
been the beginning of the discussion, and we are naturally
in suspense as to how it will proceed. But so
much is already gained, that a spirit of independence
is roused among the Bishops. Much is said here about
the desertion of certain Bishops from the ranks of the
Opposition, and new names are mentioned every morning,
often with the remark that So-and-so has let himself
be caught with the bait of one of the fifteen vacant
Hats. These Hats are held here to be capable of working
miracles. There is thought to be no more effective
means of working the conversion of a hardened anti-Infallibilist
than a decoration of that kind, and, in truth,
the number might not be great of those who would say
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
with Darboy, <q>Je n'ai point de rhumer de cerveau, je
n'ai pas besoin de chapeau.</q> As long as fifteen of these
Hats are suspended in the air ready to descend on a willing
head, so long, every Italian is convinced, there can be
no lack of conversions. The example of the Synod of
Constantinople in 859 is quoted, where the Bishops were
induced to vote for the deposition of Synesius by promising
each of them separately the Patriarchal throne.
Yet of the majority of French, German, Hungarian, and
American Bishops, no one who knows them would
expect this weakness; and so on closer inspection these
rumours come to nothing. Even Ketteler, who had
been given up for lost on account of his intimate relations
with the Jesuits,&mdash;he lives in the German College&mdash;shows
himself firm, and the most important personage
who as yet has deceived the expectations formed of
him is Cardinal Bonnechose, Archbishop of Rouen.
It is stated in German circles that fifteen Spanish
Bishops are wavering, and show a disposition to join
the Opposition. The apprehension that the other
party, whose admirable organization and adroitness in
manœuvring deserves the highest praise, will carry
through Infallibility by a <foreign rend='italic'>coup</foreign> still survives, and only
yesterday several Bishops entered the Council Hall in
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
dread of being taken by surprise by the acclamation.
Cardinal di Pietro says it is no longer possible to drop
the affair; things have gone too far already.
</p>

<p>
I understand the feeling of the Roman clergy, and
their indignation at these stubborn Hyperboreans. It
is as though one wanted to snatch from the hands of
the thirsty wanderer, who, after long toil, had at length
reached the fountain, the cup he was raising to his lips.
With Infallibility, as it is now defined and made clear
as the sun at noonday by the Jesuits, all resistance is
broken, every attack triumphantly parried, every end
brought within reach. If the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> once becomes by
this means the horny Siegfried, no vulnerable point
even in the back will be left. The Jesuit Schrader,
in his book on Roman unity, has proved that every
act and every ordinance of the Pope is infallible.
For, as he says, <q>all Papal measures, as regards
their truth, belong to the order of faith, or morals,
or law. All decrees, whatever their subject, always
contain a true doctrine, whether speculative, moral,
or juridical. But the Pope is infallible in the order
of truth and doctrine, and therefore in all his decrees.</q>
Your readers will believe I am ridiculing or
calumniating the valiant Jesuit, who shines at present
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
as a star of the first magnitude in the theological
heavens of Rome; but I have only given a faithful
translation, as any one may ascertain for himself. That
is the logic which prevails here, and which no Roman
cleric doubts to be of triumphant force.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dec. 30.</hi>&mdash;The second Session of the General Congregation
on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> took place yesterday. About a
third of the hall had been cut off by a partition, so that
the speakers could be somewhat better understood.
Among the five speakers, who, like the seven that had
preceded them, pronounced for the rejection of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, Strossmayer, and Ginoulbiac, of Grenoble, who is
considered the best theologian among the French Bishops,
commanded most attention. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was again
censured for going much too far in its statements and
condemnations, and it was shown that the Council, by
accepting it, would enter on a wholly new path, widely
different from that of the earlier Councils, where the
Church would be forced into constantly narrower definitions,
until a complete dogmatic philosophy, stiff and
rigid, had been formalized. Strossmayer also observed
on the formula of promulgation selected by Pius, which
represents the Pope as a dogmatic lawgiver, and the
Council as a mere consultative body called in to assist
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
him, that it is an unheard-of innovation, departing from
all conciliar traditions. This led to an opposite statement
by Cardinal Capalti, one of the Presidents, and
a reply from Strossmayer. As yet no single one of
the host of 500 has said a word in defence of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. The excitement is, as may be conceived,
great. That even Rauscher came forward against the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> created the more sensation, as it was he who
brought its author, Schrader, to the University of
Vienna.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Eighth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Jan. 8, 1870.</hi>&mdash;One month is now gone by
without any result, or, as many here say, simply wasted.
The first real Session, on January 6, went off without any
single decree being published. It has produced a very
painful impression generally, that, for the obvious purpose
of something to do, the unmeaning ceremony has
been adopted of swearing to the profession of faith
which every Prelate had already sworn to at his
ordination and at other times. The question was inevitably
forced on men's minds whether this profusion
of superfluous swearings, in an assembly of men on
whose orthodoxy no shadow of suspicion had been cast,
was at all fitting or reconcilable with the Scriptural
prohibition of needless oaths. But the Session had been
announced, and the Opposition Bishops, contrary to
expectation, had found a great deal to censure in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> in general and in detail, so that in four General
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
Congregations nothing had been effected. The simplest
plan would have been to defer the Session, and anywhere
else that course would have been followed. But
in Rome? That would have been a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de facto</foreign> confession
of having made a mistake, and it is here a first principle
that the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> is always right. So they had 747
oaths taken, and thus the Solemn Session was held.
</p>

<p>
It is exceedingly convenient to have to deal with a
majority of 600 Prelates, who are simply your creatures,
obedient to every hint, and admirably disciplined.
Three hundred of them are still further bound to Pius
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> by a special tie, for they are indebted to him, as the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> of January 1 reminded them, for both food and
lodging, <q>sono da lui alloggiati e sostentati e assistiti in
tutto il bisognevole alla vita.</q> Nor does that journal
fail to point to the extreme poverty of many of the
Bishops or Vicars-Apostolic, drawn hither from Asia,
Africa, and Australia; even among the European
Bishops it calls many <q>poverissimi.</q> Who has paid
their travelling expenses, it says not. The <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> may
be easy; none of them will swell the ranks of the
Opposition, or attack the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, or refuse their votes
and acclamations to the infallibility of their benefactor.
And then the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> has another powerful factor to
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
rely upon; it says, and confirms what it says by the
words used by the Pope at the Centenary, June 27,
1867, that from the tomb of St. Peter issues a secret
force, which inspires the Bishops with a bold and enterprising
spirit and great-hearted decisions. If I rightly
understand the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, it means that for many Bishops
it is a risk, and requires a lofty courage, to vote for
Papal Infallibility here in Rome, while the clergy and
laity of their own dioceses, excepting a few old women of
either sex, never hitherto knew, or wished to know, anything
of this Infallibility, and the prevalent belief has
always been that the business of Bishops at a Council
was only to bear witness to the faith and tradition of
their Churches, not to construct new dogmas strange to
the minds of their flocks. <q>Nous avons changé tout
cela,</q> thinks the Roman journal, and therefore is the
Council held in St. Peter's, and not in the Lateran, that
the <q>secret force</q> may take full effect. Certainly there
is no lack of secret forces here, They are in full
activity; there is an address being hawked about, praying
the Pope to take up the Infallibility question at
once, and put the Council in a position to vote upon it.
This time the movement originated with two German
Bishops, Martin of Paderborn and Senestrey of Regensburg.
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
Slender causes and great effects! When the
pond is full, a couple of moles can produce a flood by
working their way through the dam. Both of these
men have become perceptibly impatient at the obstinate
and rebellious disposition of their German and Austrian
colleagues, and are seeking to hasten the day, when,
with the new dogma in their hands, they may triumph
as willing believers over the forced belief of their
brethren, only converted at the last moment. The
address seems to have flashed suddenly upon the world,
for&mdash;so said Mermillod and the rest of the initiated&mdash;its
very existence was hardly known of; and it had
500 signatures. It was not shown to Bishops of
notoriously anti-Infallibilist sentiments, but no labour is
spared with the doubtful, and others who have not yet
declared themselves, so that it is quite possible 600
signatures may be scraped together. Papal Infallibility
is here limited to cases where the Pope addresses his
dogmatic decision to the whole Catholic Church.<note place='foot'><q>Supremam ideoque ab errore immunem esse Romani Pontificis auctoritatem,
quum in rebus fidei et moram ea statuit ac præcipit quæ ab omnibus
Christi fidelibus credenda et tenenda, quæve rejicienda et damnanda
sunt.</q></note> That
was Bellarmine's view, and it would certainly offer many
advantages; for all difficulties and objections drawn
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
from the first twelve centuries of Church history would
be cut off at a stroke, as it is notorious that no Pope
during that entire period addressed any decree on
matters of faith to the whole Church. The idea never
occurred even to a Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> or Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> or Innocent
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> The two last only issued decrees at the
head and in the name of General Councils. Boniface
<hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>, in 1302, was the first who in the title addressed
his Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi> to the whole Christian world.
This Bull therefore, which makes the Pope king of
kings and sole lord in political as in religious matters,
would indeed be covered with the shield of Infallibility,
and we should have a firm and immoveable
foundation for the policy and civil law both of the present
and the future. At the same time the various hypotheses
and attempted denials rendered necessary by the case of
Pope Honorious would be got rid of at one blow. Only
this little difficulty would remain: how it came to pass
that the Popes, who only needed to prefix the word
<q>Orbi,</q> or <q>Ecclesiæ Catholicæ,</q> to their decrees, in
order to make them infallible and unassailable, so
persistently despised this simple means, and thereby
tolerated or produced so much uncertainty in the
world? All their decrees before 1302, and most of
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
them since, are addressed to particular individuals or
corporations, and therefore fallible.
</p>

<p>
The question now is, whether the minority of some
200 Prelates have spirit and harmony enough for a
counter-address. On this thread the fate of the
Catholic Church seems to hang. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> says, <q>As to
Infallibility, I believed it as plain Abbé Mastai, and
now, as Pope Mastai, I <emph>feel</emph> it.</q><note place='foot'><q>Per l'infallibilità, essendo l'Abbate Mastai, l'ho sempre creduto,
adesso, essendo Papa Mastai, la sento.</q></note> He could therefore
give us the best information, if he <q>feels</q> his infallibility,
as to whether he only feels it when he signs a
decree addressed to the whole Church, or also whenever
his dogmatic anathemas, of which we possess such an
abundance, are addressed to a single Bishop or national
Church only. Meanwhile, if that large section of the
Infallibilists who are fanatical get the upper hand,
no distinctions will be admitted; the matter will be
settled straight off by acclamation, and the Pope will
be simply told, <q>Thou alone art always inspired by the
Holy Ghost, whether speaking to all, to many, or to
one, and every word of thine is for us the command of
God.</q> Others naturally opine that the matter cannot
be so easily arranged, but that the question must be
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
taken up in good earnest and sifted to the bottom, that
it may be demonstrated to the whole world that Infallibility
admits of historical illustration.
</p>

<p>
In a conversation which took place to-day between
two leading men of the opposite parties, a Belgian and
a Frenchman, the former said, <q>Je veux que l'on discute
à fond tous les textes et tous les faits.</q> The Frenchman
answered, <q>Je souffre de penser que le Saint Siége va
être discuté et disséqué de la sorte!</q> That is, in truth,
a serious anxiety. To begin with, no discussion among
the Fathers can be dreamt of so long as the Council
Hall in St. Peter's is kept to, for the speeches made
there already for the most part were not understood
at all, or only by very few. What is heard is waves
of sound, not words and sentences. But even if at
last a room better suited for human voices and ears is
found, the question of Infallibility would never be
submitted to a regular and really free discussion. How
would the Romance majority of Spaniards and Italians,
who are the slaves of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> but the masters of
the Council, and whose whole intellectual outfit is
based on the scholasticism of the seminaries&mdash;how
would they receive it, if an audacious German or
Frenchman were to throw the light of history and
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
criticism on the rambling Infallibilist evidences of, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
a Perrone? What scenes should we witness! The
offenders would be reduced to silence, not only by the
throats but the feet of the majority.<note place='foot'>[This reads almost like a prophecy, when we remember how afterwards,
and on slighter provocation than is here supposed, hundreds of the Infallibilist
Bishops danced like maniacs round the pulpit when Strossmayer and
Schwarzenberg were speaking, yelling and shaking their fists at them.&mdash;Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>infr.</hi> Letter <ref target='Letter_XXXII'>xxxii</ref>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> Either the discussion
will be broken off, when it is begun, or it will never
be allowed to begin. And therefore so many favour the
plan of acclamation; and it is related how Archbishop
Darboy assured the Cardinal de Luca that such an
attempt would be followed by the immediate departure
and protest of a number of Bishops.<note place='foot'>[Archbishop Darboy's interposition stopped the conspiracy being
carried out at the first General Congregation, and four American Bishops
disconcerted a second similar plot on St. Joseph's Day, March 19.&mdash;Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>infr.</hi> Letter <ref target='Letter_XXXVI'>xxxvi</ref>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Ninth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Jan. 9, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The Opposition has become
exceedingly troublesome. The successive gradation
of Roman judgments about it is noteworthy. First,
it was said that the Council ran like a well-oiled
machine; that all were of one mind, and only vied
with each other in their devotion to the Supreme
Head. Then the local correspondents of foreign papers
reported that something which looked like opposition
was manifesting itself, but it was a mere drop in the
ocean. So said the London <hi rend='italic'>Tablet</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Weekly Register</hi>.
Next they allowed there was certainly an Opposition, but
it was already demoralized, or, as Antonelli said, must
speedily fall to pieces. In diplomatic circles it was said
that they were good people enough, but one must wait a
little till the impressions of Fulda had worn off, and they
had imbibed the <foreign rend='italic'>spirito Romano</foreign>; <q>il leur faut deux
mois de Rome, et tout le monde sera d'accord.</q> One
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
month more, January, has to pass, and then in February
conversions and desertions will begin. Meanwhile,
Simor, Primate of Hungary, Tarnóczy of Salzburg, and
Manning, are favourites for vacant Hats. It is hoped
that the first will split up the harmony of the Hungarian
Bishops, and bring over some with him as
trophies into the Infallibilist camp.
</p>

<p>
Cardinals Schwarzenberg and Rauscher&mdash;that is now
become perfectly clear&mdash;have not budged an inch;
both of them feel thoroughly as Germans, and are
nowise minded to desert, cowardly and despairing, into
the great Romance camp. Schwarzenberg has circulated
an excellently composed treatise, which speaks out
very judiciously on the real needs of the Church, and
certain reforms which are become urgently needed,
and emphasizes the perversity shown in the demand
for the Infallibilist dogma.<note place='foot'><q>In specie ne Concilium declaret vel definiat infallibilitatem summi
Pontificis, a doctissimis et prudentissimus fidelibus S. Sedi intime addictis
vehementer optatur. Gravia enim mala exinde oritura timent tum fidelibus
tum infidelibus. Fideles enim ... corde turbarentur magis quam erigerentur,
ac si nunc demum fundamentum Ecclesiæ et veræ doctrinæ stabiliendum
sit; infideles vero novarum calumniarum et derisionum materiam
lucrarentur. Neque desunt qui ejusmodi definitionem logice impossibilem
vocant et ad ipsam Ecclesiam provocant, quæ ad instar solis splendorem
lucis suæ monstrat quidem, sed non definit. Jure denique quæritur, cui
usui ista definitio foret, de cujus sensu, modo et ambitu ampla inter
theologos controversia est.</q></note> Cardinal Rauscher has
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
done the same, and his treatise against Infallibility is
now in circulation. Something more has occurred also:
on the 2d of January, 25 Austrian and German Bishops,
with Schwarzenberg at their head, subscribed a protest,
drawn up by Haynald, Ketteler, and Strossmayer, which
is said to have been read and talked over fifteen times
before it gave entire satisfaction. They appeal to their
inherent rights, not dependent on Papal grace, but on
Divine institution; ready as they are to guard the
rights of the Head, they must also demand that the
rights of the members shall be preserved and respected;
the forms and traditions of the Tridentine Synod
should not be so far departed from. The tone of the
document is dignified. Rauscher has not subscribed
though he thoroughly agrees with it, it is said from
considerations the force of which the other Prelates
acknowledged. The petition handed in by 15 French
Prelates for an alteration of the order of business the
Pope has answered by a mere dry refusal. We shall
soon see whether the Germans will meet with similar
treatment; in the eyes of these Italians the most
modest criticisms and demands are open rebellion. To
many of the German and Hungarian Bishops even
this Protest seemed too bold and audacious, and they
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
have prepared another representation, with forty signatures,
expressed in much more moderate terms. They
entreat the Pope to be graciously pleased to allow them
to inspect the stenographic reports, and to let the
Bishops print their treatises on the questions laid before
them without the censorship, for the information of
their colleagues. Posterity will marvel at the humble
submissiveness of these Bishops, and the wisdom of the
Roman policy, which, after two years' preparation for
the Council, provides a hall where all discussion is
impossible, and furthermore prohibits the Bishops
from inspecting the stenographic reports of their own
speeches.
</p>

<p>
Some ten of the leading Bishops of different nations
have formed themselves into an International Committee,
so as not, for the future, to ask concessions of the
Pope in the name of one nation only&mdash;the French or
German. They wish that every Bishop should be
admitted to speak in Congregation according to the
order of inscription, irrespective of hierarchial rank or
age, and that the speeches should be at once printed,
and distributed to the Bishops before the next Session;
and finally, that the Papal Commission for revising
motions, which holds the whole Council in its hands,
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
should be increased by the introduction of members
freely elected. Some further requisitions which I am
not acquainted with are said to be added.
</p>

<p>
Against these things, which make the Pope very
irritable, two principal remedies are adopted. In the
first place, an attempt is made to prevent any number of
Bishops meeting together, either by direct prohibition
or by announcing the displeasure of the supreme
authority against those who take part in such separate
deliberations, which are said to be revolutionary.
And next, the Bishops are worked upon individually,
and every one is watched and taken stock of, on the
assumption that everybody has his price, if one could
only discover what it is. Two examples of this may
be cited here. One of the most distinguished German
Bishops, who is free from the usual clerical vanity, and
could neither be bought with titles nor with the cut or
colour of a vestment, was quite lately accosted by the
Pope&mdash;in full consciousness of his Vicarship of Christ&mdash;with
the question, asked in the most affectionate tone,
<q>Amas me?</q> What inference was attached to an
affirmative answer need not be specified. The other
case occurred somewhat earlier. Lavigerie, Bishop of
Nancy, came to Rome coveting some striking mark
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
of distinction. It seemed worth while to bind him
closer to the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and so an article of ecclesiastical
dress was hit upon, which he and no other Bishop of
the Western Church was to wear. It was called a
superhumeral, and is described as a somewhat broader
stole, thrown over the shoulders, and adorned with
fringes, with two maniples of the shape of shields
hanging down from it. The effect is said to have been
enormous, and of course since then Mgr. Lavigerie is a
profoundly convinced Infallibilist. <q>C'est avec de
hochets qu'on mène les hommes,</q> said the first
Napoleon; but it moves one's pity to look at Bishops
who let themselves be led by the nose by these childish
toys.
</p>

<p>
Very instructive considerations may be formed here
on the representation of particular nations and national
Churches at the Council. Frenchmen and Germans must
practise themselves in the virtues of humility and modesty,
and learn how insignificant they are in the Catholic
Church, in all that concerns doctrine and legislation.
There is the diocese of Breslau, with 1,700,000 Catholics,
but its Bishop has not been chosen for any single Commission,
while the 700,000 inhabitants of the present
Roman States are represented by 62 Bishops, and the
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
Italians form half or two-thirds in every Commission.
For the Kingdom of God, wherein the least is greater
than John and all the Prophets, lies, as is well known,
between Montefiascone and Terracina, and whoever
first saw the light in Sonnino, Velletri, Ceccano, Anagni,
or Rieti, is predestinated from the cradle <q>imperio
regere populos.</q> It is true the 62 Bishops of this
chosen land and people have not succeeded in restoring
the most moderate standard of morality in their
little towns and villages; there are still whole communities
and districts notoriously in league with brigands&mdash;but
the Council has no call to trouble itself with
matters of that sort. There are the Archbishops of
Cologne with 1,400,000, of Cambray with 1,300,000,
and of Paris with 2,000,000 Catholics, but any four
of the 62 Neapolitan and Sicilian Bishops can out-vote
these Bishops with their 5,000,000 Catholics at their
back. Thus the 12,000,000 Catholics of Germany Proper
are represented at this Council by fourteen votes.
Their relative positions may be expressed in this
way: in Church matters twenty Germans count for less
than one Italian. And should a German indulge any
fancy that his nation, with its numerous theological
High Schools, and its learned theologians, might reasonably
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
claim some weight at a Council, he only need
come here to be cured at once of that notion. There is not
in all Italy one single real Theological Faculty, except in
Rome; Spain gets on equally without any higher theological
school or any theology; yet here at the Council
some hundreds of Italians and Spaniards are masters,
and are the appointed teachers of doctrine and dictators
of faith for all nations belonging to the Church.
</p>

<p>
Count Terenzio Mamiani has lately observed, in the
<hi rend='italic'>Nuova Antologia</hi>, published at Florence, that in Italy
there are not so many religious books printed in half a
century as appear in England or North America (or Germany)
in one year. And we must remember too that the
theological literature published in Tuscany and Lombardy
might almost be called copious in comparison
with the nearly absolute sterility of the States of the
Church. Here in Rome you may find a lottery dream-book
in almost every house, but never a New Testament,
and extremely seldom any religious book at all.
It seems as though it were a recognised principle that, the
more ignorant a people, the greater must be the share their
hierarchy have in the government of the Church. And
thus we have the question of nationalities within the
bosom of the Church. Everything done here is but
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
the expression of one idea and the means to one end,
and this idea and end are that the spiritual domination
of the Italians over the other nations, especially over
the Germans and French, should be extended and confirmed.
Above a hundred Spaniards have come from
both sides of the ocean to let themselves be used as
instruments of the Italians at the Council. They have
no thought, or will, or suggestion of their own for
the good of the Church. It is difficult to form a
notion of the ignorance of these Latins in all historical
questions, and their entire want of that general cultivation
which is assumed with us as a matter of course in
a priest or bishop. And up to this time I have always
found here that the predilection for the Infallibilist
theory is in precise proportion to the ignorance of its
advocates. It has been deemed necessary still further
to help on this immense numerical superiority, and so
the Pope, as I am informed, has appointed during the
two years since the proclamation of the Council 89
Bishops <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, whose flocks are in the moon or in
Sirius.
</p>

<p>
And now for something about the course of procedure
in the Council as to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> during the last
ten days. There are only constantly speeches on each
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
side, for a real discussion is impossible in the Hall,
and it is obvious that it was chosen, and is still kept
to in spite of daily experience, for that very reason.<note place='foot'>[Monsignor Nardi said this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>totidem verbis</foreign> to an Anglican clergyman
who was inspecting the Council Hall.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
Some speakers, however, whom nature has endowed
with a specially ringing voice, have made an unwonted
impression. The most significant occurrence was Cardinal
Capalti's interruption of Strossmayer's speech.
The Bishop had touched on the novel and unconciliar
form in which the decrees were to be published, as
decisions of the Pope, with the mere approval or forced
consent of the Council. It was an ominous circumstance
that the assembly sacrificed by its silence the
man who was speaking for its rights. Meanwhile there
has been a wholly unexpected attack on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> by
a host of speakers, so that Antonelli, on leaving the
Council, said, in visible excitement, to a diplomatist who
was waiting for him, that this could not continue, or
the Council would go on for ten years. Strossmayer
was followed by Ginoulhiac, the learned Bishop of
Grenoble, who spoke in the same sense. The proportion
of speakers against the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> is overwhelming. In
the Session of January 3, all four spoke against it, even
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
the Patriarch of Venice. An impression was produced
by the warning of the Eastern Patriarch, Hassoun,
against embittering the Orientals, and driving them
into schism by dogmatic innovations. The Italian,
Valerga, named by the Pope to the Latin Patriarchate
of Jerusalem, represented the Roman standpoint in its
crudest form, but he had his speech read for him by
Bishop Gandolfi.
</p>

<p>
It is now said to be certain that Darboy, Simor, and
Tarnóczy have been apprised of the intention to make
them Cardinals. As regards the two last, the abandonment
of all opposition to the Infallibilist dogma, and to
every other decree on faith in a Papal sense, is an
indispensable condition. But with Darboy the case
is different: the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> must take him as he is or
let him alone, for he cannot be bought at any price.
The irritation, complaints, and sighs of the Pope at
having to make this man a Cardinal, who will not
yield or apologize, have already lasted some years. The
Romanist party have published in a Quebec newspaper
the Pope's bitter and reproachful letter to him, to which
he made no reply. Darboy was and is resolved to be
the <foreign rend='italic'>bonâ fide</foreign> Bishop of his diocese, the largest in the
world, and will not admit any arbitrary encroachments
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
or concurrent jurisdiction of the Court of Rome to annul
his acts at its caprice. <q>This stinks of schism,</q> say the
Romans here.<note place='foot'><q>Questo puzza di schisma.</q></note> And therefore, according to Roman
notions, he is <q>a bad Christian,</q> for he does not believe
in Papal Infallibility, and will not vote for it even as a
Cardinal. Moreover, nobody sees better through the
whole web of curialistic policy, with its artifices, small
and great, and he shows not the slightest sympathy for
it, so that in any case he will be a very inconvenient
and unprofitable Cardinal. At the same time he is a
man of rare eloquence, rich experience and knowledge
of mankind, and easily outweighs ten Italian Cardinals
in culture and learning. And the worst of it is that this
bitter necessity of elevating Darboy has to be accepted
with a good grace, for France wills it, and France must
still remain the magnanimous champion of Rome and
the Council. Some consolation is found for it in the
now openly proclaimed apostasy of Archbishop Spalding
of Baltimore, who has hitherto been wavering, for
it is hoped that other American Bishops will follow his
example.
</p>

<p>
If at the end of the first month we take a view of
the situation, it is clear that the word <q>Council</q> requires
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
to be taken in a very wide and general sense to include
this assembly. It cannot be compared with the ancient
Councils in the first thousand years of Church history,
before the separation of East and West, for there are no
points of contact. In the first place, the whole lay
world, all sovereigns and their ambassadors, are entirely
excluded from the Synod, which has never happened
from the Council of Nice downwards. That was, of
course, necessary, for even at Trent the French ambassador
announced, on entering the Council, that his
King had sent him to watch over the freedom of the
Bishops; and certainly the ambassadors of Catholic
Powers would have protested against the present
arrangements and order of business, which give
much less security than even at Trent. Here the
Bishops are in a sense the Pope's prisoners. Without
his permission they cannot leave the Council, they are
forbidden to meet together for common deliberation,
are not allowed to print anything till it has passed the
censorship, or to bring forward any motion without the
Pope's approval. It is the Pope who makes the decrees
and defines the dogmas; the Council has simply to
assent. Two rights only are left to the Bishops; they
can make speeches in the General Congregation, and
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
they can say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>. There is a quite luxurious
abundance of means of coercion, impediments and
chains;&mdash;with the Pope's 300 episcopal boarders, the
62 Bishops of the Roman States, the 68 Neapolitans,
Sicilians, etc., all manœuvring with a precision a
Prussian General could not wish to surpass on the
reviewing-ground, the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> might have fairly hoped to
gain its ends, even were a little more freedom allowed
to the Opposition section of the Assembly.<note place='foot'>[Compare with this account of the freedom of the Council the letters of
two French Bishops, published in the <hi rend='italic'>Times</hi> of May 3, and the <hi rend='italic'>Journal
des Débats</hi> of May 10.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Tenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Jan. 15, 1870.</hi>&mdash;On Sunday last the Pope gave
audience to a great crowd of visitors,&mdash;some 700 or
1000, it is said,&mdash;at once, and took occasion to express
before them his displeasure at the Opposition Bishops.
He said there were some Prelates who lacked the temper
of perfect faith, and hence arose difficulties, which
however he, the Pope, should know how to overcome.
In Church matters no attention was to be paid to the
judgment of the world, as he himself despised it, for
the Church's kingdom is not of this world. It has
hitherto of course been held in the Church that the judgment
of the world&mdash;that is, of their flocks, who constitute
their own immediate world&mdash;is exactly what the
Bishops ought to attend to very much, and to avoid
giving offence to them and perplexing their consciences
in matters of religion.
</p>

<p>
The prohibition to hold large episcopal meetings, communicated
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
to the French Bishops only through Cardinal
Bonnechose, is not obeyed either by the French or Germans,
who continue to take counsel together. The
united Germans and Hungarians have accepted in substance
an address drawn up by Cardinal Rauscher, and
on Sunday, January 9, bound themselves by a reciprocal
obligation, with forty-three signatures, to vote against
and combat in all conciliar methods the erection of
Papal Infallibility into a dogma. The Austrian Prelates
stand foremost in clearness, decision, and courage.
Rauscher, Schwarzenberg, Haynald, and Strossmayer
know what they want, are full of true love for the
Church, understand the greatness of the danger, and
are perfectly aware that no positive gain, nor any of
the important reforms so urgently needed, can be
expected from this Council&mdash;the Spanish and Italian
phalanx is too strong and impenetrable for that,&mdash;but
they hope, at least, by energetic resistance to ward off
positive mischief from the Church.
</p>

<p>
The French on their part are active; Cardinal Mathieu,
who returned to Rome, January 5, has opened a
saloon in his house for the deliberations. Next to Dupanloup,
Bishop Place of Marseilles, Meignan of Châlons,
Landriot of Rheims, and Ginoulhiac of Grenoble, speak
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
most decidedly. There are some thirty-five like-minded
with them, and the inopportunists among them and the
Germans are gradually coming to perceive that their
position is quite untenable, and that to persist in treating
Infallibility as a mere question of time and convenience,
is to give their adversaries a safe and easy victory. But
the Germans are further advanced in this conviction
than the French. The now famous Infallibilist Address
seems to have been simultaneously hawked about from
two quarters, viz., by the trio of Manning, Deschamps,
and Spalding, and by Martin and Senestrey. Who
composed it, and how many Bishops have signed it, is
still uncertain; the movement has come to a dead-lock,
perhaps because the Spaniards, who talk of presenting
an address of their own, don't want to sign it. Several
Italians too refused to sign, and so the result has not
been as satisfactory as was hoped, although it can
hardly be doubted that the dogma will have 450 or
500 votes when it is laid before the Council.
</p>

<p>
It is a characteristic feature of the case, that throughout
Italy prayers are offered in all the monastic communities
still surviving, and in all zealously Catholic
families, for the definition of the new dogma. The fact
is mentioned in English journals, and I have heard it
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
confirmed here. It reveals the patriotic feeling, that
Papal Infallibility is an Italian possession more or less
profitable to every member of the nation. <q>The Pope,</q> as
one hears it said here, <q>will always feel and think above
all as an Italian; his decrees are manufactured by a
Court nine-tenths of whom, at least, are Italians, and
with his infallibility under our management, we Italians
shall be able to dominate and make capital out of
all other nations, in so far as they desire to be Catholic.</q>
The Italian is generally a good calculator. However,
Italian priests and prelates feel and know right well
what every nation and national Church owes to itself.
If the Papacy belonged to any other nation, the Italians
would never dream for a moment of acknowledging the
system of Papal absolutism with its grand prop of Papal
Infallibility. One soon observes, in conversing with
these Monsignori, how they despise in their hearts the
French and German Ultramontane Bishops, while at
the same time admitting the correctness of their views,
and praising them liberally for rolling in the dust before
the infallible <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and crying out to the Romans, as
that orator Ekebolius cried out to the Emperor Julian,
<q>Only trample us under your feet, the salt that has
lost its savour.</q>
</p>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<p>
Thirty-five German Bishops have declared at the
beginning, that they are ready to subscribe the above-mentioned
counter address against the dogma of Infallibility,
pretty fully expressed in the form of a petition
to the Pope, and among them are included those who
were before of opinion that they had sufficiently discharged
their duty by the letter they sent to him from
Fulda. This is a praiseworthy example of harmony,
but at the same time the greatness of the danger, which
has now become evident to even the most trustful mind,
is shown by the fact that all present at the consultation
on this address bound themselves in writing to
subscribe it. It is needless to say that the Tyrolese and
the pupils of the Jesuits, with Bishop Martin, held
aloof from the meeting.
</p>

<p>
Another proof was given on this occasion of the very
different measure dealt to the two parties. The Infallibilist
Address was at once printed, though everything
else here has first to undergo the most rigorous censorship.
The Roman censors would, of course, have
refused their <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>imprimatur</foreign> to the counter address, and
there was some scruple felt about printing it out of the
country, as though by an evasion of the Papal laws, and
so it cannot be printed at all. Even Bishop Dupanloup
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
has been refused permission to print his answer
to Deschamps. The address will probably be subscribed
by the Bishops of each nation in separate
batches, so that there will be five addresses, coinciding
in substance. Forty-seven Germans and Hungarians
are reckoned on&mdash;so many have subscribed already&mdash;and
thirty-five French. The Anglo-Americans have
somewhat altered the wording of the address, and say
they can command twenty-five signatures. But what
is most remarkable is, that a considerable section of the
North-Italian Bishops from Piedmont and Lombardy
now come out as opponents of Infallibilism, and give
promise of twenty-five signatures for the counter address.
The decisive point with them is their relation to the
Italian nation and government, for the Infallibilist
dogma must inevitably lead to a hopelessly incurable
rupture between it and the Church. To these must be
added six Irish and four Portuguese, making in all an
Opposition of from 140 to 150 votes.
</p>

<p>
The great question daily mooted in the Vatican is
now, how Infallibility can be erected into a dogma in
spite of the resistance of the Opposition minority, for
there is no longer any illusion as to an obstinate residue
of anti-Infallibilist protesters being sure to be left, after
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
allowing for the fullest effects of all the alluring seductions
used. Precedents are sought for in the history of
Councils where the majority has passed decrees according
to its own will, without regard to the opposite
representations and negative votes of the minority. But
no such precedents are to be found. At all Councils
from Nice downwards the dogmatic decrees have always
been passed only with entire or approximate unanimity.
Even at Trent, where the Italians, commanded
from Rome through the legates, dominated everything,
many very important decrees were abandoned after
being drawn up, as soon as a few Bishops only had
pronounced against them. If only this fatal precedent
of the Tridentine Synod could be got rid of! The
Jesuits investigate and refine, but, unluckily for them,
one of their own body, Father Matignon, in 1868, when
an Opposition was still believed to be impossible, himself
established the fact, and justified it on doctrinal
grounds;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Études de Théologie</hi>, Janvier 1868, p. 26:&mdash;<q>Le Concile n'imposait
rien à notre foi, qui n'eût obtenu à peu près l'unanimité des votes.
L'obligation de croire est une chose si grave, le droit de lier les intelligences
est un droit si auguste et si important, que les pères pensaient n'en
devoir user qu'avec la plus grande réserve et la plus extrême délicatesse.</q></note> and that is made use of now. So there is
nothing left but to labour indefatigably for the conversion
of opponents. But people in Rome seem not to
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
know <q>qu'on ne prend pas les mouches avec du
vinaigre;</q> and that methods of coercion, intimidation,
and discrediting character, are not quite the most
effectual means, psychologically, for converting adverse
Bishops, is clear from the tone again and again manifested
in the speeches on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, which has gained
conspicuously in sharpness and explicitness. On January
10, a Northern Prelate, distinguished for gentleness
and refinement, but accustomed to parliamentary contests,
said he had been obliged to speak in the vigorous style
usual in his own country of the entire absence of real
freedom in the Council, for the insolence of the other
party was becoming daily more intolerable.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Eleventh Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Jan. 17, 1870.</hi>&mdash;It is a remarkable phenomenon
that Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, who is every way inferior to his predecessors
of this century in theological culture, lets himself
be so completely dominated by his passion for creating
new articles of faith. Former Popes have indeed had
their hobbies: some wanted to aggrandize and enrich
their families; others, like Sixtus <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>, were zealous in
building, or, like Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>, in fostering art and literature,
or they waged wars like Julius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, or, finally, they
wrote learned works, and composed many long Bulls full
of quotations, etc., like Benedict <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi> But not one of
them has been seized with this passion for manufacturing
dogmas; it is something quite unique in the history
of the Popes. Herein, therefore, Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> is a singular
phenomenon in his way, and all the more wonderful
from his hitherto having kept aloof from theology, and, as
one always hears, not being in the habit of ever reading
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
theological books. If it is inquired how this strange
idiosyncrasy has been aroused in the soul of a Pope
who began his reign under such very different auspices,
as a political reformer, the answer given by every one
is, that it is the Jesuits, whose influence over him has
been constantly growing since he took Father Mignardi
of that Order for his confessor, and who have
created and fostered in him this passion for dogma-making.
</p>

<p>
The displeasure and discontent of the Bishops finds
constant nutriment in the conduct of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. They
say that if these momentous propositions had been laid
before them in good time, some months before the
opening of the Council, so that they might have carefully
examined them and pursued the theological studies
requisite for that purpose, they should have come duly
prepared, whereas now they are in the position of having
to speak and vote on the most difficult questions almost
extempore. The attacks and objections directed against
the first part of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> in their speeches have not
applied so much to the separate articles as to the general
scope and tendency of the whole, and I have not been
able to ascertain anything more certain about the
matter, for the real elaboration of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and discussion
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
of its articles in detail, has to be managed in the
Commission; in the Council Hall it is impossible. As
yet there have been only long speeches on either side,
as in academies or in a school of rhetoric, which, for the
most part, were not understood, and in which the main
question&mdash;what shape the decrees are to take, if issued
at all&mdash;was never grappled with.
</p>

<p>
On Friday, January 14, the debate on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>
opened. This is occupied with the duties of Bishops&mdash;their
residence, visitation of their dioceses, and obligation
of frequently travelling to Rome and presenting
regular reports on the state of their dioceses; the holding
of Provincial and Diocesan Synods, and Vicars-General.
The duties of Bishops are the one thing
spoken of, and the design is everywhere transparent of
increasing their dependence on the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and centralizing
all Church government in Rome still more than
before. Archbishop Darboy observed on it, that it was
above all necessary, in examining this second <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>,
to discuss the rights of Bishops, instead of only the
duties Rome assigned them. Cardinal Schwarzenberg
had really opened the debate in this sense, and he had
the courage to speak of the College of Cardinals, and the
reforms it needed. A simple Bishop would not have
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
been suffered to do this, but they dared not interrupt a
Cardinal. The speakers who followed, too, had a good
deal to find fault with in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, especially Ballerini,
formerly rejected as Archbishop of Milan, and now
titular Patriarch of Alexandria, and Simor the Primate
of Hungary. This Prelate has protested so emphatically
against the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> and the treatment the Bishops
have experienced at the hands of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, that the
offer of a Cardinal's Hat seems by no means to have
produced the desired effect upon him. There are said
to be still sixteen portions or chapters of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>
in reserve, so that the authorities are already displeased
at the length of the Bishops' speeches; and lately one
Bishop gained general applause by saying he renounced
his right to speak.
</p>

<p>
We may gain some very valuable evidences in Russia
and Poland as to how Papal Infallibility is already
conceived of, and what hopes and fears respectively are
entertained in reference to the projected new dogma.
The six or seven million Catholics of that empire are
very variously situated, and have different interests,
and therefore, in some sort, opposite wishes. Among
the Polish Catholics, who are just now being denationalized
and Russianized, many are always looking
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
out for the overthrow of the Russian dominion, and the
restoration of a kingdom of Poland. To this party
belongs Sosnowski, formerly administrator of the
diocese of Lublin, whom the Pope has admitted to the
Council. He is to represent the whole Polish Church
at the Council, and is an ardent Infallibilist; he has
accordingly given a severe snubbing, by way of answer,
to the Polish priests who had communicated to him certain
proposals of reform, with a view of restricting Papal
absolutism, to be laid before the Council. His reply
circulates here, and is also to be printed in a newspaper
published at Posen. Sosnowski represents to
the Polish clergy that the emancipation of Poland from
Russia must continue to be the great object; and that
for this a Pope recognised as completely absolute and
infallible is indispensable. He appears to mean that
such a Pope, being supreme lord over all monarchs and
nations, can even depose the Russian Czar, or at least
absolve the Poles from their oath of allegiance. He
moreover assures them that Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> has told him
he reckons confidently on this emancipation of Poland
from Russia. Here in Rome it is said and taught that
the Pope is supreme master even of heretical and
schismatical just as much as of Catholic sovereigns; for
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
through baptism, whether received within or without
the Church, every one at once becomes his subject.
And we are reminded, in proof of this, how Pope Martin
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, in 1282, deposed the Greek Emperor, Michael
Palæologus, and absolved his subjects from their
allegiance, simply because he had made a treaty with
the King of Aragon. This explains why the Russian
Government told the Bishops who requested leave to
attend the Council, that they might go to Rome, but
should not return. The 2,800,000 Catholics in Russia
Proper, in the ecclesiastical province of Mohilew, think
very differently from Sosnowski. A clergyman from
thence said to-day, <q>If Papal Infallibility is made an
article of faith, put into the catechisms and taught in
the schools, it will bring us into a most difficult and
desperate position as regards the Russian Government
and people. We shall be told that our Czar sits in
Rome, and that we obey him rather than the Czar at
St. Petersburg, to whom we only swear a conditional
allegiance, holding ourselves ready to rebel, if our infallible
master at Rome absolves us from the oath; that
we put his commands and prohibitions above the law
of the land and the will of the Emperor. And thus,
if Papal Infallibility is defined at Rome, it will be
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
almost equivalent for us to a sentence of death on the
Catholic Church in Russia, for everything will be done
to undermine a Church regarded as an enemy and
standing menace to the State.</q>
</p>

<p>
Two new works have arrived here, each of which, in
its own way, touches on the great question of the
day. The one is a book of Dr. Pusey's, on the relations
of the English Church to the Catholic, where he
declares that making Papal Infallibility a dogma would
destroy all hope of a reunion of the Churches, or of the
adhesion of any considerable section of the English
Church.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Is Healthful Reunion Impossible?</hi> By E. B. Pusey, D.D. Rivingtons,
1870.</note> Manning has assured them in Rome of
precisely the reverse. The other work is the first
Letter of the famous Oratorian, Father Gratry, to the
Archbishop of Mechlin, a pungent criticism on that
Prelate's brochure in favour of Infallibility, and on his
gross misrepresentations of the history of Pope Honorius.<note place='foot'>[Gratry's four Letters have been translated by the Rev. T. J. Bailey.&mdash;(Hayes).&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
Gratry also exposes the Roman falsifications
introduced into the Breviary. It may alarm the curialists,
when they discover how all the most intellectually
conspicuous among the French clergy pronounce
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
against their favourite doctrine, and their design
of imposing it on the whole Church, and how the
disreputable means employed for building up this system,
by trickery and forgeries, are more and more
being brought to light.
</p>

<p>
The Pope's attempt to reduce 740 members of the
Council to complete silence on all that goes on there
has proved a failure, as might have been foreseen. A
great deal has come out, and the Pope manifests great
displeasure at it. In a conversation with a diplomatist,
who asked him how, with this rule, trustworthy
reports could be sent to the different Governments, he accused
the French Bishops of violating the secrets of the
Council, and called them <q>chatterboxes</q> (<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>chiacceroni</foreign>).
Accordingly, in the Session of January 14, a more rigorous
version of the order of business was read, to the effect
that the Pope had made it a mortal sin to communicate
anything that took place in the Council; so that
any Bishop who should, for instance, show a theologian,
whose advice he wanted, a passage from the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>
under discussion, or repeat an expression used in one
of the speeches, incurs everlasting damnation! If your
readers think this incredible, I can only assure them
that it is literally true, and must refer them to the
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
moral theology of the Jesuits on the foundation of the
Pope's right to brand human actions, forbidden by no
law of God, with the guilt of mortal sin, at his good
pleasure. A Papal theologian, whom I questioned on
the subject, appealed simply to the statement of Boniface
<hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>, that the Pope holds all rights in the shrine of
his breast.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twelfth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Jan. 26.</hi>&mdash;The grand topic of all conversations
is Bishop Strossmayer's speech of yesterday; and it is
possible to give a pretty correct description of its contents,
which seem to have made a profound impression
on his 747 hearers. The Bishop declared it to be
unseemly to begin with the disciplinary decrees about
Bishops and their obligations, because this might raise
the suspicion in their dioceses that their recent conduct
had given occasion to it. When their duties were
spoken of, their rights should also be put forward.
But, in fact, the reform must be carried through from the
highest ranks of the hierarchy to the lowest, so that the
Bishops should be introduced in their proper order.
He spoke of the necessity of making the Papacy common
property, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, making non-Italians eligible; for it
is now a purely Italian institution, to the immense
prejudice of its power and influence. He pointedly
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
insisted on a similar universalizing of the Roman Congregations,
so that the important affairs of the Catholic
Church should not be arranged and settled in a narrow
and jealous spirit, as had unfortunately been the case
hitherto. And all matters not necessarily pertaining to
the whole Church must be withdrawn from the competence
of the Congregations, so that it might no longer
be the case, as before, <q>ut qui superfluis et minimis
intendit, necessariis desit.</q>
</p>

<p>
Strossmayer insisted on a reform of the College of
Cardinals, in the sense of its containing a representation
of all Catholic countries in proportion to their extent
and importance. The impression produced is said to
have been most thrilling, when he exclaimed that it
was to be wished the supreme authority in the Church
had its throne, where the Lord had fixed His own, in
the hearts and consciences of the people, and this would
never be the case while the Papacy remained an Italian
institution. And with regard to the more frequent
holding of Councils, he is said to have reminded the
Fathers of the <hi rend='italic'>Decretum Perpetuum</hi> of Constance, that
a Council should be assembled every ten years. But
the presiding Legates seemed to be greatly disturbed at
the mention of Constance. The Bishop proceeded to
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
point out that ordinary prudence urgently dictated to
the Church the more frequent holding of Councils. The
increased facilities of intercourse supplied means to the
Church to gather more frequently in Council round its
head, and thus show an example to the more advanced
nations, who transact their affairs in common assemblies,
of the open-heartedness and freedom, the patience and
perseverance, the charity and moderation, with which
great questions should be treated. Once, when Synods
were more frequent in the Church, the nations had
learnt from her how to bring their affairs to a settlement,
but now the Church must offer herself
teacher in the great art of self-government.
</p>

<p>
Strossmayer urged that an influence over episcopal
appointments should be given to Provincial Synods,
in order to remedy the dangers connected with the
present system of nominations, which have become
incalculable. He lashed with incisive words and brilliant
arguments those who preach a crusade against
modern society, and openly expressed his conviction
that henceforth the Church must seek the external
guarantees of her freedom solely in the public liberties
of the nations, and the internal in intrusting the episcopal
Sees to men filled with the spirit of Chrysostom,
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
Ambrose, and Anselm. It cut to the quick when he
spoke of the centralization which is stifling the life of
the Church, and of the Church's unity, which only then
reflects the harmony of heaven and educates men's
spirits, when her various elements retain inviolate their
proper rights and specific institutions. But as the
Church now is, and in the organization designed to be
imposed on her, her unity is rather a monotony that
kills the spirit, excites manifold disgust, and repels
instead of attracting. On this point the Bishop is said
to have made very remarkable statements from his own
experience, proving that, as long as the present system
of narrow centralization endures, union with the Eastern
Church is inconceivable, and, on the contrary, new perils
and defections will be witnessed. He called the canon
law a Babylonish confusion, made up of impractical
and in most cases corrupted or spurious canons. The
Church and the whole world expect the Council to
make an end of this state of things by a codification
adapted to the age, but which must be prepared by
learned and practical men from every part of the
Catholic world, and not by Roman divines and canonists.
In repudiating the proposal of a previous speaker, that
the Pope should take a general oversight of the Catholic
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
press, he seized the opportunity of pronouncing a glowing
panegyric on a man who had been shamefully
maligned by that press, but to whom is chiefly owed
any real freedom that exists in this Council. Every
eye was turned on Dupanloup.
</p>

<p>
Many single sayings are quoted from this magnificent
speech. A French Prelate had desired that Bishops
should not sit in the confessional; Strossmayer replied
that he must have forgotten he was the countryman of
St. Francis of Sales. Another speaker had maintained
that the reformation of the Cardinals should be intrusted
to their Father, the Pope; Strossmayer replied
that they had also a Mother, the Church, to whom it
always belongs to give them good advice and instruction.
</p>

<p>
The speech lasted an hour and a half, and the impression
produced was overwhelming. Bishops affirm that
no such eloquence in the Latin tongue has been heard
for centuries. Strossmayer does not indeed always
speak classical Latin, but he speaks it with astonishing
readiness and elegance. Cardinal di Pietro, who
answered him yesterday, spoke of the <q>rara venustas</q>
of his speech. It is related in proof of his noble manner,
and the spirit in which he spoke and was listened
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
to, that the opponent he most sharply attacked immediately
asked him to dinner. He is said to have
received 400 visits in consequence of his speech. The
President paid him a singular compliment in putting
out a special admonition the day after his speech against
any manifestation of applause.
</p>

<p>
There was the greatest excitement beforehand. His
eloquence was already known from his former speech,
which was rendered more significant from the Legates
interrupting him. Had he been again interrupted this
time, every one felt that the freedom of the Council
would be in the greatest danger. Strossmayer's tact
and moderation prevented it, although it was observed
that Cardinal Bilio wished on one occasion to make the
Presidents interfere. When Strossmayer mounted the
tribune, somebody was heard to say, <q>That is the Bishop
against whom the bell will be used.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirteenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Jan. 30, 1870.</hi>&mdash;A great deal has happened
since my letter of January 17. My last was exclusively
devoted to the impression produced by Strossmayer's
speech, and I must go back to several previous occurrences.
I will therefore enter directly on the most
important facts of the last few days. You have already
heard from the telegrams that the Pope has returned the
addresses of the Opposition, of which there were several,
divided according to nationality. They will be at once
handed over to the Commission <hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi>, composed of
twenty-four members. These counter addresses are
subscribed by 137 Bishops, while 400 or 410 have
signed the first address in favour of the dogma. This
document, I can now inform you definitely, was the
joint production of a committee consisting of Manning,
Deschamps, Spalding, the German Bishops Martin and
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
Senestrey, Bishop Canossa of Verona, Mermillod of
Geneva, and perhaps one or two more. That none of
these gentlemen, or of the 400 signataries, have observed
the gross and palpable untruths and falsifications of
which this composition is made up, is marvellous, and
justifies the most unfavourable inferences as to the
theological and historical cultivation of these Prelates.
If the names of the Bishops on either side are, not
counted simply, but weighed, and the fact is taken into
account that the main strength of the Infallibilist legion
consists of the 300 Papal boarders who go through thick
and thin in singing to the tune of their entertainer&mdash;that
all the host of titular Bishops, with very few exceptions,
and of the Romance South Americans, who are
even more ignorant than the Spaniards, are ranged on
the same side&mdash;and if we then compare the countries and
dioceses represented respectively by the 400 and the
137, we shall come to the conclusion that the overwhelming
preponderance in number of souls, in intelligence,
and in national importance, is wholly on the side
of the 137 of the Opposition. It is besides affirmed
now that the Address of the 400 was not really presented
to the Pope at all, but withdrawn at the last moment.
If that is true, it must have been in consequence of a
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
command or hint from the Pope, either from his advisers
even yet feeling ashamed of exposing him by the reception
of a document bristling with falsehoods, or because
they thought he could not in that case reject the hated
counter address, as he has done, without too glaring
an exhibition of partisanship. The Spaniards have
drawn up an address of their own, which harmonizes so
well with the address of the 400, that Manning declared
himself quite ready to sign it.
</p>

<p>
The second important occurrence of the last few days
is the treatment of the Chaldean Patriarch, an aged man of
seventy-eight. He had commissioned another Bishop to
deliver a speech he had composed, when translated into
Latin, in the Council, expressing his desire to preserve
the ancient <foreign rend='italic'>consuetudines</foreign> of his Church and to lay a new
compendium of them before the assembly. He added,
with indirect reference to the Infallibilist dogma, a warning
against innovations, which might destroy the Eastern
Church. The Pope at once ordered him to be summoned,
he was to bring nobody with him; only Valerga, whom
the Pope has named Patriarch of Jerusalem, one of the
most devoted courtiers of the Vatican, was present as
interpreter. He found the Pope in a state of violent
excitement, trembling with passion, and after a great
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
deal of vehement language he was commanded either
to resign his office on the spot, or renounce all the prerogatives
and privileges of his Church. His request for
two days to consider the matter was instantly refused,
as also the request for leave to consult his own suffragans
then in Rome. Had he refused, he would certainly
have been incarcerated in a Roman prison; for it is
notorious that according to the Roman theory every
cleric is the subject, not only spiritually but bodily, of
his absolute lord the Pope. So nothing was left him
but to subscribe one of the papers laid before him, and
make his renunciation.
</p>

<p>
The third recent circumstance to be mentioned is the
confidential mission of Lavigerie, Archbishop of Algiers,
to Paris. I have spoken of this man before as Bishop
of Nancy, and forgot to add that he had been translated
to Algiers. He is to persuade the Emperor and the
ministers Ollivier and Daru to make no opposition to
the passing of the Infallibilist dogma, and to offer in
return that the articles of the Syllabus on Church and
State shall be either dropped, or modified in their application
to France. He of course asserts that he has no
mission of the kind, and is only going to Paris about an
educational question, just as Cardinal Mathieu professed
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
to have only gone to France to hold an ordination.<note place='foot'>[Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supr.</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>. The <hi rend='italic'>Tablet</hi> made the same assertions in both
cases.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> In
Paris the strangeness of the situation is remarked on,
that the very State which used always most vigorously
to assert its independence against the domineering pretensions
of the Pope is now suffering, not only the
infallibility but the supreme dominion of the Pope, and
his right of interference in its political affairs, to be
decreed under cover of its bayonets. And in Rome it
is understood that, if the French troops were suddenly
to disappear during the rejoicings and illuminations
following on the Infallibilist triumph, the situation
might become very uncomfortable. It is therefore
thought that a couple of articles of the Syllabus might
the more easily be surrendered, as the shield of Infallibility
would cover the whole Syllabus, and no one could
hinder an infallible Pope from taking the first opportunity,
in spite of all secret promises, of again utilizing
the principle now made into a dogma. The Roman
clerics, whether high or low, are unable to comprehend
that not only the German but the Latin nations feel so
decided an antipathy to the domination of the priesthood
over civil and social life, and on that account only
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
must resist the Infallibilist theory, because it involves
the doctrine that the Pope is to encroach on the secular
and political domain with commands and punishments,
the moment he can do so without too great prejudice to
his office and fear of humiliation. It seems so natural
and obvious to a Roman Monsignore or Abbate that
the chief priest should rule also over monarchs and
nations in worldly matters; from youth up he has seen
clergymen acting as police-officers, criminal judges, and
lottery collectors, and has no other experience than of
the parish priest, the Bishop, and the Inquisition, interfering
in the innermost concerns of family life, and the
<q>paternal government</q> often taking the shape of a strait-waistcoat;
he lives in a world where the confusion of
the two powers is incarnated in every college, congregation,
and administrative office. Nowhere but in
Rome would it have been possible for Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>xii.</hi>, with
universal consent of all the clergy, high and low,
to re-introduce the Latin language into the law courts
after it had been abolished under the French occupation.
</p>

<p>
Lately, for the first time, a local priest, Leonardo
Proja, in a work published here, has openly expressed
his confidence that the Council will at once condemn
the shocking error of setting aside the supreme dominion
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
of the Pope over the nations, even in civil matters
(<q>vel in civilibus</q>) as an invention of the Middle
Ages.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Adversus eos qui Sanctissimum R. Pontificis studium et Vaticani
Concilii celebrandi necessitatem vituperant.</hi> Romæ.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Court of Rome and the Bishops are at present
studying in a school of mutual instruction. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
studies the Bishops individually, especially the more
prominent among them, and watches for their weak
points and the ways of getting at them and making
them pliable, and, above all, of dissolving national ties.
They don't always manage matters skilfully, for the
want of all real freedom, the use of coercive measures,
and this apparatus of bolts and bars, cords and man-traps,
by which the Prelates are surrounded and threatened at
every step in Council, by no means produce a <foreign rend='italic'>couleur
de rose</foreign> state of feeling, and the contrast between the
title of Brother, which the Pope gives officially to every
Bishop, and his way of treating them all, both individually
and collectively, like so many schoolboys, is too
glaring. Even the boasted freedom of speech does not
extend very far, for every Prelate speaks under threat
of interruption by the bell of the presiding Cardinal,
directly he says anything displeasing to Roman ears.
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
On the other hand, the Bishops, during their stay
here of six or seven weeks, have learnt a good deal
more than the curialists, and many of them have really
made immense advances, before which the Romans
would recoil with a shudder, if they could see how
things stand. A great many of these Prelates came
here full of absolute devotion to the Pope, and with
great confidence in the integrity of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and the
purity of its motives. When they found themselves
oppressed and injured at home by its measures or
decrees, they still thought it was so much the better in
the other branches of ecclesiastical administration. But
now, and here, scales have, as it were, fallen from their
eyes, and they are daily getting to understand more
clearly the two mighty levers of the gigantic machine.
The dominant view in Roman clerical circles here is,
that the Church in its present condition needs, above
all things, greater centralization at Rome, the extension
and deepening of Papal powers, the removal of any
limitations still standing in the way in national
Churches, and the increase of the revenues accruing
from Papal innovations. This it is the business of the
Council to accomplish. When, therefore, two Bishops
lately attacked in their speeches the abuse of expensive
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
marriage dispensations, it was at once said,
<q>Well, then, if any change is made, what is to become
of our Congregations and the revenues of their
members?</q>
</p>

<p>
The Bishops will return home poorer in their happy
confidence, but richer in such impressions and experiences.
They will also carry back from Rome with them
a fuller knowledge of the Jesuit Order, its spirit and tendencies.
They now see clearly that the grand aim of the
Order is to establish at least one fortress in every diocese
with a Papal garrison, and to hold bishops, clergy, and
people under complete subjection to Rome and her commands.
A French Bishop observed the other day, <q>If
matters go on in this way, we shall have even our holy
water sent us ready-made from Rome.</q> And the Jesuits'
business is to see that things do go on in this way. The
Bishops have now an opportunity of seeing through the
tacit compact, perfectly understood on both sides, between
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and the Order. The Pope accepts the
Jesuit theology, and imposes it on the whole Church,
for which he requires to be infallible; the Jesuits labour
in the pulpit, the confessional, the schoolroom, and the
press for the dominion of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and the Romanizing
of all Church life. One hand washes the other, and the
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
two parties say, <q>We serve, in order to rule.</q> So far
the relations of parties are clear enough, and result
from the nature of the case. It is less easy to define
the attitude and disposition of the Bishops towards
each other.<note place='foot'>[Some idea of it may be formed from the answer made some months
ago by a distinguished English Prelate at Rome to an Anglican friend,
who had quoted the words of one of the Opposition Bishops, <q>You need
not quote <emph>them</emph> to me; <emph>they are no more Catholics than you are</emph>,</q>&mdash;thus
excommunicating at one swoop the very flower of the hierarchy of his
Church.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fourteenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 2, 1870.</hi>&mdash;There is evidently a deep split
running through the Council. It is not merely the
question of Infallibility which divides the Bishops,
though this rules the whole situation. Each party has
an opposite programme. The majority, with their reserve
of the 300 Papal boarders, speak and act on the principle
that they are there to accept without objection
or substantial change whatever their master, the Pope,
puts before them; that they are as Bishops what the
Jesuits are as Priests&mdash;the heralds of the Pope's omnipotence
and infallibility, and the first executors of his
commands&mdash;and accordingly they mean to vote against
every motion not introduced or sanctioned by the Pope,
and to impede, both in Council and out of Council, whatever
would displease him or curtail the revenues of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. And thus the 130 or 140 Bishops, who wish
for improvement in Church matters, are thwarted and
paralysed at every step by an adverse majority of 400,
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
admirably generalled. Cardinal Barnabó, Prefect of the
Propaganda, is one of the most deserving men in the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> from this point of view. He maintains good
discipline among the missionary Bishops, and is not
ashamed to besiege an individual Bishop who is under
Propaganda, or supported by it, for a whole evening,
and threaten him with the withdrawal of his pay if he
does not vote just as the Pope desires.
</p>

<p>
Midway between the two opposite camps there stands
a body of some 150 Prelates of different nations, averse
to the new dogma and to the whole plan of fabricating
dogmas, to which the Jesuits are impelling the Pope,
and alive to the necessity and desirableness of many
reforms, but who, on various grounds, shrink from
speaking out plainly and with the guarantee of their
names.
</p>

<p>
As far as I can gather from personal intercourse of
various kinds with many of the Infallibilist Bishops,
their zeal is chiefly due to the following notions:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>First</hi>, They are more or less impressed by the representation
that there is a general need for new dogmas,
and that the old ones are no longer sufficient; but for
preparing and enforcing these a single infallible dictator
is better adapted than an episcopal assembly. For,
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
besides the inevitable opposition of a minority to every
new dogma, the Bishops could never come forward as
more than witnesses of the tradition of their respective
Churches, whereas the infallible Pope, under direct
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, can at once make into a
dogma and article of faith whatever is clear to himself,
without troubling himself about the past or the tradition
of particular Churches, even the Roman,&mdash;as, for
instance, at present, the doctrine of the bodily Assumption
of the Virgin Mary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Secondly</hi>&mdash;and this is a crucial point,&mdash;The distinction
between Bishops learned or ignorant in theology
will become immaterial, because henceforth they will
be mere promulgators and executors of Papal decrees on
faith, and therefore ignorance of theology and Church
history, which still has some importance, and is felt as
a defect to be ashamed of, will no longer be any reproach
to a Bishop. He who has no judgment of his
own to form may well be incapable of forming one; he
is the mere speaking-trumpet of one above him.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Thirdly</hi>, Theology itself will be greatly simplified,
and its study rendered shorter and easier. Those
lengthy historical proofs of dogmas, the investigations
as to the range and consequences of a doctrine and the
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
like, will all become superfluous, and matters will be
settled out of hand by a brief question to the Pope and
his reply. A collection of these rescripts, under the
title of <q>The Art of Learning Theology in a Week,</q>
may henceforth be placed in the hands of every candidate
for the priesthood, and would supply the place of
a whole library. Even as a matter of economy this is
no despicable advantage. The majority of 400 and
minority of 137 are then opposed to each other in this
way:&mdash;the majority, or the Spanish and Italian section (<foreign rend='italic'>a
fortiori fit denominatio</foreign>) say, <q>We are resolved to abdicate
as a teaching body and integral constituent of the
ecclesiastical ministry; we desire to commit suicide
for the benefit of the Church, in order that the authority
of a single man may be substituted for the collective
authority of the whole episcopate and of all Churches.</q>
The minority think, on the other hand, <q>We are resolved
to hand down inviolate to our successors the inheritance
of eighteen centuries, bequeathed to us by our predecessors.
Our spiritual forefathers were judges and
definers in matters of doctrine, and such we desire to
remain; we do not choose to give a helping hand to
making ourselves and our successors mere acclaimers
instead of definers.</q>
</p>

<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>

<p>
For the rest, it involves a logical contradiction on the
part of the Infallibilists to lay any special weight on
mere numbers, for nothing turns on the votes of the
Bishops in their system, but everything depends on the
decision of the Pope. If 600 Bishops were ranged on
one side and the Pope with 6 Bishops on the other,
the 600 would be thereby proved to be in error and
the 6 in possession of the truth. Cardinal Noailles
observed very correctly, 150 years ago, that 300 Bishops,
who proclaim a doctrinal principle on the mere word
of a Pope whom they regard as infallible, have no more
weight than one single Bishop who votes on his own
personal conviction. The opposition of the minority, as
might be expected from their antecedents of the last
twenty years, is indeed wrapped up in cotton, but at
bottom it is positive enough. It comes to saying that,
if the Pope really wishes the Council to take in hand
the question of Infallibility, witnesses must be heard
on the subject.
</p>

<p>
The Address of the forty-five German and Hungarian
Bishops objects to the boundaries, as they had been
hitherto drawn by the Pope for the teaching of the
Church, being transgressed, and the Council being compelled
to enter on a discussion of the grounds <hi rend='italic'>pro</hi> and
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
<hi rend='italic'>con</hi>, which must necessarily bring much suspicious matter
into public debate. The definition itself would be sure
to excite hostility against the Church, even with men of
the better sort (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>melioris notæ viros</foreign>) and lead to attacks
upon her rights. It may be said that the whole German
episcopate, and the immense majority of the German
Catholic Church by their mouth, has spoken out
against the Infallibilist dogma.
</p>

<p>
Simor, Patriarch of Hungary, has not, or at least not
yet, subscribed the Address, but he spoke emphatically
against the dogma in the meeting of German Bishops
on January 16. All the other Hungarian Bishops at
Rome, thirteen in number, have signed the Address;
only the Greek Uniate Bishop of Papp-Szilaghy has,
like Simor, omitted to do so. The North Italian
Bishops too have determined on an address, substantially
identical with the German one.
</p>

<p>
The French Address, which thirty-three Bishops
agreed to on January 15, at a meeting at Cardinal
Mathieu's, differs somewhat in wording from the
German, but the contents are the same in the main,
and it is hoped to get forty signatures for this; twenty
French Bishops wish to abstain from signing anything,
and something under twenty have signed Manning's
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
address, so that there are still twice as many French on
the side of the Opposition as of the definition. We
may add seventeen North Americans, who have accepted
the German Address, with the omission of the
clauses omitted in the French one, while the North
Italians adopted it unaltered. The opposition to the
dogma has thus maintained an universal character, including
the most various nationalities. But it would be
hardly feasible to decide a new dogma by mere counting
of heads, treating the Bishops, like the privates of a
regiment, as all equal, so that one vote is worth just
the same as another. An analysis of the component
elements of this majority, and a comparison of it with
the Opposition in scientific culture and representation
of souls, would give sufficiently impressive results.
</p>

<p>
The most startling phenomenon is presented by the
Belgian and English Bishops. The former are all on
the Infallibilist side, and there can be no doubt that
they understand the political importance of the new
dogma. They apparently wish to make the breach
incurable between the Catholics of the younger generation
and the Liberal party, who adhere to the Belgian
Constitution; for no Catholic for the future can at once
recognise the doctrine of Papal Infallibility and the
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
principles of the Belgian civil law, without contradiction.
What makes the majority of English Bishops
zealous adherents of Infallibilism it is hard to say;
they are not in other respects disposed to be led by
Manning. Nor can we assume that, like the Belgians,
they deliberately wish to make the Catholic Church of
their country the irreconcilable foe of the British Constitution,
though that would be the inevitable consequence
of the doctrine. It has been pointed out to
these Prelates from England, that the solemn declarations
of English and Irish Catholics are still preserved
in the State Archives, in which they formally renounced
belief in Papal Infallibility, and purchased thereby the
abolition of the old penal laws and Emancipation. Thus
it is said in the <q>Declaration and Protestation,</q> signed
by 1740 persons, including 241 priests, <q>We acknowledge
no infallibility in the Pope.</q> In the <q>Form of
Oath and Declaration,</q> taken in 1793 by all Irish
Catholics, occur the words, <q>I also declare that it is not
an article of the Catholic faith, neither am I thereby
required to believe or profess, that the Pope is infallible.</q>
And a Synod of Irish Bishops, in 1810, declared
this oath and declaration to be <q>a constituent part of
the Roman Catholic religion, as taught by the Bishops;
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
a formula affirmed by the Roman Catholic Churches
in Ireland, and sanctioned and approved by the other
Roman Catholic Churches.</q>
</p>

<p>
I hear that, among the Irish Bishops, Moriarty is
averse to breaking with the ancient tradition of his
Church. Bishop Brown of Newport, an open and
decided opponent of Infallibilism, is kept away by ill
health; Ullathorne of Birmingham and Archbishop
MacHale of Tuam wish also to keep clear of it, but
without signing the address. Bishop Clifford of Clifton,
on the contrary, as I hear, has signed it. So Manning's
following among his countrymen is a very
divided one.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifteenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 4.</hi>&mdash;There is a good deal of interesting
matter to report of the Sessions of the last few weeks.
And, first, as to the Council Hall: notwithstanding the
great curtain, it remains a wretched apology for a
Council-chamber, and I must repeat emphatically that
such a discussion as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, was possible in St. Paul's
Church, at Frankfort, in 1848, would be hardly practicable
here. Bishops whose voices are feeble and not
penetrating enough, must give up the idea of speaking,
and even strong men among them feel thoroughly exhausted
after they have spoken. A French Bishop,
whose speech had produced a great effect, said afterwards
of the hall, <q>Elle est sourde, muette, et aveugle.</q>
But the Pope persists, on account of the neighbourhood
of the so-called <q>Confession of St. Peter,</q> from which
he thinks a force issues to bind the Bishops closer to
him, and fill them with contempt of the world. This
influence, however, has been very little manifested as
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
yet&mdash;rather the reverse. There have been many Opposition
speeches, and the bell of the presiding Legate
not unfrequently interrupts them with its shrill dissonance;
in the latter Sessions a new method has been
practised of reducing unpleasant speakers to silence&mdash;by
scraping with the feet. It is a striking fact that
talent, eloquence, and force of thought are observed to
be almost entirely on the side of the Opposition; very
few men of mark or able speakers can be mentioned on
the Infallibilist side. Manning and Mermillod would
be good and versatile speakers, only they are not sufficiently
masters of Latin. Deschamps alone on that
side has won great applause as an eloquent speaker,
though with sufficient poverty of thought.
</p>

<p>
Among the Cardinals, de Angelis, de Luca, Bilio,
and Capalti are considered the four Papal pillars of the
Council. Bilio, a Barnabite, and still a young man,
passes in Rome for an eminent theologian, and while
the other Cardinals and Monsignori would hold it a
sin to understand German, he knows two German words,
which he constantly repeats, but always with a shudder,
<q>deutsche Wissenschaft.</q> He thinks German science
something like the witches' caldron in Macbeth&mdash;full
of horrible ingredients.
</p>

<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>

<p>
The first dogmatic <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> has gone back to the Commission
on Faith after a long, many-sided, and severe
criticism, and is to be revised and again laid before the
Council as little altered as possible. The revision is
intrusted to three of the most zealous Infallibilists,
Martin, Deschamps, and Pie, with the indispensable
Jesuits, Schrader and Franzelin. The Bishops are then
simply to accept it without discussion. It is not to
be discussed, first, because there can be no discussion
in the Hall; secondly, because this wretched patchwork
does not bear discussion; thirdly, because there would
be no coming to an end this way; fourthly, and chiefly,
because an excellent precedent will be created, which
may be made a rule for the forthcoming <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>, and
will open the prospect of carrying through matters far
more important and more valuable for the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>.
</p>

<p>
If once the first <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> were voted without discussion,
by the help of the devoted majority of 400, though
against the opposition of many Bishops, the same
method might be pursued with subsequent <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>,
and thus the most important of all, on the Church and
the Pope, could be carried, which contains the most
exorbitant assertions of Papal omnipotence, and implies
Papal Infallibility, which is introduced by a side-wind.
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
By this means the maxim observed at former Councils,
and even at Trent, that decisions can only be settled by
a unanimous vote, would be happily got rid of, and the
resistance of the Opposition broken or rendered useless.
Such a victory of the curialistic party would exceed all
other successes in importance and practical value. The
Council is accordingly come to a momentous crisis.
Father Theiner, the Prefect of the Papal Archives, has
had a part of the first volume of his <hi rend='italic'>Acts of the Council
of Trent</hi> printed. We find there a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>modus procedendi</foreign>,
which secures to the Fathers of the Council much more
freedom and action than the present regulations, of which
Italian Prelates say themselves that they leave no
freedom, and only allow a sham Council. Theiner has
been altogether forbidden, by the management of the
Jesuits, to publish his work, and has received the most
strict commands not to show the part already printed
to any Bishop.
</p>

<p>
The introduction of the second <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, on Discipline,
gave occasion to many earnest and important speeches.
The Germans at first had to blush for one of their
number, Martin of Paderborn, who made a speech overflowing
with the most unqualified devotion to the will
of the supreme master, the authorship of which was
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
attributed to his Jesuit domestic chaplain, Father Roh.
But the speech of Archbishop Melchers of Cologne made
all the more favourable impression. He spoke, with quiet
dignity and freedom, of the perversity and shamefulness
of the meddling Roman domination, the system of dispensations,
and the unmeasured centralization. Great
was the astonishment of the assembly; Cardinal Capalti
went on urging, with impatient look and sign, on de Luca,
the President for the day, to stop the German Archbishop.
At last, when he had nearly finished, de Luca interrupted
him, and said he must hand in his proposals to the
Commission. Melchers did not let himself be put down;
he replied that he had done that long ago, and had received
no answer, and observed that he spoke in the
name of more than a million German Catholics. And
then he quietly went on with his speech. The words
of Archbishop Haynald cut deeper still; he is the best
speaker in the Council after Strossmayer, and is also
subtle and circumspect, so that the Legate, who was
visibly anxious to interrupt him, could not discover the
right moment for putting his bell in motion.
</p>

<p>
As little did they dare to interrupt Darboy, Archbishop
of Paris, when he ascended the tribune and
began as follows:&mdash;<q>We are told we are not to make
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
long speeches, but I have a great deal to say. We are
told again not to repeat what has been said by others,
but at the same time we are kept shut up in this Hall,
where for the most part we cannot understand one another;
we are not allowed to examine the stenographic
reports of our speeches, and the only answer made to
our representations is always the same&mdash;<q>The Pope wills
it.</q> I don't know therefore what has been said by the
speakers who have preceded me.</q> He then went on to
speak of the rights of the Bishops, their degradation by
the Roman centralizing system, <q>the caves, wherein
the Roman doctors have buried themselves from the
light of day,</q> etc. He spoke in admirable style, and
was listened to with rapt attention, though at every
word his auditors expected an interruption from the
Legate; but it never came. Darboy himself said afterwards
that he had done like Condé, and flung his
marshal's staff into the ranks of the enemy.
</p>

<p>
On January 22, Dupanloup made a speech in the
same sense, which has already been reported to you,
and took occasion to mention those courtiers who have
learnt never to tell the truth to the Pope. Courtiers
of this sort from various nations sat and stood in crowds
around him. He might have added what was said to
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
the Pope&mdash;vainly, of course&mdash;300 years ago, in a work
composed by his order, and is just as true now as then:
that the dream of omnipotence and infallibility, so
studiously produced and cherished in his soul by flatterers,
is the main cause, next to the avarice of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, of the decline and corruptions of the Church.
Meanwhile it is truly wonderful that so much could be
said at all; it was felt to be a moral discomfiture or
capitulation of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> in its state of siege. Cardinal
Schwarzenberg, and after him the Primate of Hungary,
had certainly struck the note which still rang on, but
the Legates had not dared to silence them with the
bell, and so missed the opportunity of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>principiis obsta</foreign>.
Schwarzenberg had already created a great sensation
by recommending the periodical recurrence of Councils,
afterwards taken up by Strossmayer, and then falling
back on the decree of Constance (for decennial Councils),
which is an abomination at Rome. No doubt they
would have no objection in Rome to Councils every
ten or twenty years, suitably modernized, manipulated,
and obedient to every wink, like the present majority;
but the fatal Opposition embitters this enjoyment, and
when once the great work is accomplished, and Infallibility
proclaimed, it will be found at Rome that all this
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
machinery is not worth its pay, <q>que le jeu ne vaut pas
la chandelle;</q> for it costs too much money to entertain
300 <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>-saying Bishops, to make it worth while often
to reproduce the drama, or rather the pantomine.
</p>

<p>
Other Prelates, whom the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> reckons among the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dî minores gentium</foreign>, have no indulgence shown them.
When an American Bishop spoke of the corruptions
and gross falsehoods in the Roman Breviary, and of the
fabulous interpolations in the works of some Fathers,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, St. Augustine, inserted there, Capalti rang his bell
violently&mdash;the Fathers were not to be so spoken of.
But the American did not let himself be disturbed, and
proceeded at once to quote the Breviary lections from
St. Gregory. He was again called to order, and told he
must change the subject or leave the tribune.
</p>

<p>
In this second <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, compiled by Jacobini, the
second Secretary of the Council, the gross ignorance of
the author is glaringly exposed. With the usual self-sufficiency
of Rome, and with the aim of making the
Bishops still more dependent on the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> than before,
the special conditions of whole countries had been
ignored. Thus every Bishop, who wished to leave his
diocese, was first to get the Pope's permission from
Rome, and the Archbishops were to delate all who
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
acted otherwise at Rome. Simor observed sharply on
that, <q>This then is the position Rome assigns to
Metropolitans, after robbing them of all their ancient
rights: to be the accusers of their conprovincial Bishops.</q>
Another declared roundly that, if his physician sent him
to a watering-place, he should not think of asking leave
from Rome. Jacobini would not even recognise the
right of Bishops to attend the political assemblies of
their countries, of which they are members by the Constitution,
because, as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> words it, <q>assembleæ
generales</q> no longer exist in the sense allowed by
Urban <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> The Pope was further to have the right
henceforth of giving away the benefices in the Bishop's
gift during the vacancy of the See, which would bring
in a large increase of taxes for the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and draw a
number of candidates to Rome again, as in the palmy
days before the Reformation. In Germany we should
get back the class of so-called <foreign rend='italic'>Curtisanen</foreign>,<note place='foot'>[The <foreign rend='italic'>Curtisanen</foreign> were clerical place-hunters, who came to Rome to beg
or traffic for benefices. Cf. <q>Janus,</q> p. 341.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> who notoriously
did so much to promote the Protestant division.
The Bishops inflicted many a blow on the abuse of
expensive dispensations to be elaborated at Rome from
artificially derived impediments of marriage (as of
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
cousins, godfathers, and the like) before the Legate's
bell could stop them. Then a Hungarian Bishop related,
how it often happens that a poor woman comes
weeping to the Bishop, to beg him to save her marriage
and her very existence by a dispensation. But the
Bishop must let the poor woman be ruined, for not he
but the Pope only can dispense, and <q>mulier non habet
pecunias&mdash;pecunias.</q> The Court Prelates said afterwards
that this Hungarian had made himself very disagreeable
with his <q>mulier non habet pecunias.</q>
</p>

<p>
The following occurrence was comic:&mdash;You know in
what repute the supple and complaisant Fessler, Bishop
of St. Pölten, is held here, the first herald for retailing
the new dogma to the world. Not long ago, Charbonnel,
the Capuchin Bishop of Sozopolis, placed himself near
him, and began to speak of clerical place-hunting, the
eagerness for distinctions and promotions among Bishops,
and the crooked ways they often take to obtain them,
and pointed so unmistakeably by look and gesticulation
at his neighbour, the Secretary, that on going out Fessler
said it was high time to put an end to the Council,
which was every day getting more disagreeable. The
question was then started by German and Hungarian
Bishops whether it would not be better, as Martin
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
thought, to substitute lay-brothers for clergymen's housekeepers,
or whether the restoration of <q>the common life</q>&mdash;the
Chrodogang institute&mdash;of course in a very modified
form, should be attempted. They overlooked the fact that
such matters cannot be regulated by a Council, but must
be arranged according to the disposition and circumstances
of the clergy in the various dioceses. Haynald,
Meignan, Bishop of Châlons, and the Chaldean Patriarch,
insisted that mere school questions should not be decided
by the Council without any necessity, and that some
freedom of movement must be left to Science. But the
word freedom has nowhere so ill a sound as at Rome.
Only one kind of freedom can be spoken of here&mdash;the
freedom of the Church; and, in their favourite and accustomed
manner of speech, by the Church is intended the
Pope, and by freedom domination over the State, according
to the Decretals. And to talk of freedom of Science!
The Council, if it entertained such views, would be forgetting
altogether that it was only called together for
two purposes&mdash;to increase the plenary power of the
Pope, and to aggrandize the Jesuits. But the Order
has, like the Paris labourer of 1848, <q>le droit du travail;</q>
it is not content to exist only, but must work&mdash;of course
in its own way,&mdash;and for this it requires two things:
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
first, new dogmas; and secondly, plenty of condemnations
and anathemas. The business of the Council is
to provide both.
</p>

<p>
The Cardinals, with the exception of Rauscher,
Schwarzenberg, and Mathieu, have taken no part in
the speaking, nor have the Generals of Orders and
Abbots. Only when the need for a reform of the Cardinals
themselves was spoken of, Cardinal di Pietro
rose, who is regarded as the most liberal-minded of the
Italians in the Sacred College, to show that such a
reform could only be a financial one, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that the Cardinals
required larger incomes. What the Bishops
meant was something very different, viz., a better and
fuller representation of different nations in the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>,
and a limitation of the Italian monopoly. But scattered
observations of that kind could elicit no sort of real
apprehension in the minds of the Italians, who are
firmly seated in the saddle; so secure do they feel in
their possession of a dominion many centuries old, and
so very odd do the claims of other nations appear to
them. In this point the present Romans or Latins are
of the same mind as the old Romans of the sinking
Republic, who sacrificed 600,000 men in the Confederate
war rather than allow equal political rights to their
Italian allies.
</p>

<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<p>
The great blow, which brings matters near a decision,
has now been just struck, and all that the Jesuit and
anti-German party longed for, and the French and
Germans feared, is now before our eyes, the third
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, <q>on the Church and the Pope,</q> has been distributed,
and leaves hardly anything to be desired in
point of clearness and plain speaking. These transparent
decrees and anathemas may be thus summed up: <q>The
Christian world consists simply of masters and slaves;
the masters are the Italians, the Pope and his Court,
and the slaves are all Bishops (including the Italians
themselves), all priests, and all the laity.</q>
</p>

<p>
This third <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, which was distributed to the
Bishops on January 21, is a lengthy document of 213
pages, entitled <hi rend='italic'>De Ecclesiâ</hi>, and it is the one the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
is chiefly bent on getting received. It is said to be the
work of a red-hot Infallibilist, Gay, Vicar-General of
the Infallibilist Bishop Pie of Poitiers, and is so drawn
up that by a slight addition the Infallibility of the
Pope, which it already leads up to and implies, can be
inserted in express form very easily, and as the necessary
logical supplement; and thus the internal harmony
of this important document, with its appended anathemas,
would be completely secured. Three main
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
ideas run through the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and are formulated into
dogmatic decrees guarded with anathemas: <hi rend='italic'>First</hi>, to
the Pope belongs absolute dominion over the whole
Church, whether dispersed or assembled in Council;
<hi rend='italic'>secondly</hi>, the Pope's temporal sovereignty over a portion
of the Peninsula must be maintained as pertaining to
dogma; <hi rend='italic'>thirdly</hi>, Church and State are immutably connected,
but in the sense that the Church's laws always
hold good before and against the civil law; and therefore
every Papal ordinance that is opposed to the Constitution
and law of the land binds the faithful, under
mortal sin, to disobedience to the Constitution and law
of their country.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixteenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 5.</hi>&mdash;On reviewing the situation, I believe
I may venture to say that it has become better, far better,
than it was a few weeks ago. For this the Christian
world is mainly indebted to the noble, dignified and
united attitude of the German and Hungarian Bishops.
These men,&mdash;I speak of course only of the majority
of the forty-six&mdash;while taking frequent and most conscientious
consultation with one another, and knowing
the three German Cardinals to be in substantial
agreement with them, have gained almost daily in
clearness of view, confidence and decision; and their
example, again, has encouraged the Bishops of other
nations. If, as many fear, Ketteler should, at the critical
moment, go over to the Papal side, and let his sympathy
for the convenient Infallibilist doctrine get the
better of his love for the German Church and nation,
his loss will be more than made up by forces newly
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
gained. Hefele, who is the first living authority about
Councils, has signed the Opposition address, and would,
I believe, have still more gladly signed a stronger one.
Three Cardinals of one nation who don't want to
have anything to do with Papal Infallibility! <q>It is
an unheard-of, an abominable thing,</q> say the Romans.
<q>O that we still had Reisach! his loss is bitter at so
critical a moment, and that we should have to console
ourselves for his death by the living voices of Martin,
Senestrey, Leonrod and Stahl, is still bitterer!</q>
</p>

<p>
The Hungarians are greatly influenced by knowing
that they would find themselves isolated in their own
country, if they, the representatives of ecclesiastical
reform, were to return from Rome conquered, and as
forced believers in Papal Infallibility and the complete
system of ecclesiastical despotism. Their position
is one of close union, and by its union is imposing;
whereas the fifteen or sixteen Bishops of Austrian
Germany are somewhat weakened by the desertion of
Martin and the three Bavarians and the approaching
apostasy of Ketteler, who is already preparing the way
for it in the <hi rend='italic'>Mainzer Journal</hi>. From thence, as I perceive,
has the falsehood gained currency, that the Opposition
are ready to accept Spalding's (professedly)
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
modified proposals, and thus to acknowledge Infallibility
in its grossest form and vote the whole third
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>&mdash;that Magna Charta of ecclesiastical absolutism&mdash;absolutely
and without any change. That would
indeed be a catastrophe almost without precedent in
Church history. We should have to assume that the
Opposition Bishops had resolved to verify in their
own case Mazarin's saying about Parliaments, that their
policy is always to say <q>No,</q> and act <q>Yes.</q> Ketteler,
moreover, has special grounds of his own for gaining or
preserving the particular favour of the Pope; for remembering
his retirement from the candidature for the Archbishopric
of Cologne, he might effect the abolition of
the compact of Rome with the Governments, which
secures a veto to the latter, and the introduction of either
entirely free elections with Papal confirmation, or, still
better, of simple nomination of Bishops by the Pope.
He has spoken in Congregation in this sense, and was
of course cheered by the Infallibilists.
</p>

<p>
No less strong and dignified is the attitude of half
the French Bishops, who have attached themselves to
men like Darboy, Dupanloup, Landriot of Rheims,
Meignan of Châlons and Ginoulhiac of Grenoble. On
the other side, there are about twenty decided Infallibilists,
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
while the rest of the French Bishops wait or
avoid speaking out. The party of Darboy and Dupanloup
have the double advantage of being supported by
their Government&mdash;while the Austrian ministry assumes
a wholly apathetic and indifferent position,&mdash;and of
belonging to the nation whose troops make the Council
and the civil Government of the Pope possible, and
whose Bishops therefore the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> is obliged to treat
with respect. A French Bishop can say a good deal
without, as a rule, having to fear being called to order
by the Legate's bell.
</p>

<p>
The North American Bishops too are being gradually
educated to ecclesiastical maturity in the school of
Rome and the Council, and have already grown out of
that naïve belief in the disinterested generosity and
superhuman wisdom of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> which most of them
brought here. To-day the Pope paid them a visit at the
American College, conversed in a friendly way with the
Bishops individually, said obliging things, and, in a word,
displayed those well-known powers of fascination he
has such a command of. <q>A month ago this would
have taken effect,</q> said an American priest who was
present, <q>but now it comes too late.</q> He also assured
me that not five of the forty-five American Bishops
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
would sign the Infallibilist Petition or vote for the
dogma.
</p>

<p>
I have heard many, and especially French, Prelates
say, during the last few days, sometimes in obscure
hints, sometimes clearly, that the Council will soon&mdash;in
a few weeks&mdash;be closed or dissolved; an opinion all
the more surprising, because nothing as yet has been
done. In that case the Bull with the many Excommunications
will have to be treated as issuing from the
Council.<note place='foot'>[The Bull <hi rend='italic'>Apostolicæ Sedis</hi>.&mdash;Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supr.</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, 1, 5, 6.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> But the only relation of the Bishops to that
Bull is as the suffering and punished party.
</p>

<p>
The third Solemn Session was to have been held on
February 2, but had again to fall through from the
want of any materials. And there are still mountains
of work and numbers of elaborate <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> awaiting
the Council; for the decrees it is summoned to make, or
rather which Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> intends to proclaim to the world,
<q>with the approbation of the Council,</q> are to be veritable
pandects embracing the entire doctrine and constitution
of the Church, regulating all relations between Church
and State, and restoring the Papal supremacy over the
bodies and souls of all men. The domain of morals, properly
so called, is alone excluded; for there the Jesuits
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
have good reasons for wishing to keep their hands free.
In short, the projected work that still remains to be done
would occupy at least a year and a half. And for this
end everything has been chosen and sharpened into the
form of canons, which can only introduce complications,
provoke conflicts with the civil Governments, embitter
the relations of rival Confessions, prejudice the position
of the Bishops, and foster the hatred of the lay
world against the clergy. And accordingly, with many
Bishops, the wish to escape taking any part in these
discussions may be father to the thought, and a speedy
end of the Council may appear to them a sort of conciliar
euthanasia. To many a Bishop has the old proverb
already occurred, in reference to the Council, that
the best thing would be not to have been born and the
next best to die early. It is not the Swiss only who
have a home-sickness. And then there is the treatment;
I heard a French Count here say to-day, <q>On
les traite d'une manière brutale.</q>
</p>

<p>
I have just received the last number of the Paris
<hi rend='italic'>Correspondant</hi>, with its article by the Viscount of Meaux,
Montalembert's son-in-law, who is here. His account
of how the Council is treated is so much to the point,
and so thoroughly confirms my own statements, that I
will quote it for you.
</p>

<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>

<p>
<q>The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>,</q> he says, at p. 347, <q>are prepared
beforehand, the order of business is imposed by authority
(<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>imposée</foreign>), the Commissions are elected before any
consultation, from official lists, by a disciplined majority
which votes as one man. On these Commissions the
minority is not represented, and there are no other
deliberations except in Congregation. Before these
Congregations the subjects are brought in all their
novelty and laid before the 700 members, without any
previous explanations. It is difficult to understand the
speeches, and there are no reports which the Fathers
can inspect, so that no Bishops have the opportunity of
submitting their thoughts to the deliberate examination
of their colleagues. Moreover, they are forbidden to
have anything printed here for the Council. All these
characteristics indicate an assembly summoned to
approve, not to discuss, intended to exalt, not to moderate,
the power which has summoned it. And with
what haste does it push on in this direction! How impatiently
does the majority press for a declaration of
Papal Infallibility!</q> So far the Viscount. Matters
must indeed have come to a pass when so cautious and
strictly Catholic a journal as the <hi rend='italic'>Correspondant</hi> presents
its readers with this picture of the Council.
</p>

<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>

<p>
There are two serious dangers to which we are always
exposed. The first I have already spoken of, which is introducing
the plan of passing the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> by majorities,
so that the desired dogma would be carried as it were by
assault. The second danger&mdash;and it seems to me far more
threatening&mdash;is that one of those involved and disguised
formulas which the Infallibilists vie with one another in
devising, in order to deceive and catch the votes of the
less sharp-sighted Prelates and thus incorporate it into
the third <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, may really succeed with the greater
number of the hitherto opposing and protesting Bishops.
This notion is in fact implied in the phrase one has
heard so often, that a middle party must be formed
among the Bishops; for the programme or shibboleth
of this middle party is to be an elastic formula, or one
only expressing the thing metaphorically, or, again, one
not sharply dogmatic but rather pious and edifying in
sound. By the help of this middle party the formula
might be made acceptable to the rest of the Prelates,
and the desired end be happily attained. Thus Mermillod
and two others have to-day invented a phrase,
which seems to them suited to square the circle and to
satisfy and unite all. They say they wish to declare
that the Pope, whenever he speaks on doctrine,
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
speaks <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tanquam os et organum Ecclesiæ</foreign>. And by this
they understand that the Church has no other mouth
than him and without him is dumb, from which it
obviously follows that he is infallible. I doubt if
many Bishops will be detained in the meshes of a
net so coarsely spun. No better is the formula invented
by Spalding, which might be called a pretty
downright one,&mdash;that everybody must inwardly assent
to every doctrinal decision of the Pope on pain of
everlasting damnation.<note place='foot'><q>Damnamus perversas eorum cavillationes qui dicere audent externum
quidem obsequium, non autem internum mentis cordisque assensum, R.
Pontificis judiciis esse præstandum.</q></note> That goes far beyond even
the Manning-Deschamps Address, which limits his infallibility
to decrees addressed to the whole Church,
while this formula of Spalding's declares every conceivable
Papal utterance (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>judicium</foreign>) infallible; for a
Christian can only give the assent of inward belief,
when there is no possibility of error and when there
is a really divine authority and revelation. Every
theologian must declare this invention of the Archbishop
of Baltimore's to be the most monstrous demand
ever made on the conscience and understanding of the
Catholic world. It is as if a courtier at Teheran were to
say, <q>I will not indeed affirm that our Shah is almighty,
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
but I do assert confidently that he can create out of
nothing whatever he will and that his will is always
accomplished.</q> The reverend Fathers who torment
themselves with inventing such devices would perhaps
do best if they were to make a collection among themselves,
and offer a prize of 100 ducats for that form of
circumlocution or involution most securely adapted for
entrapping the innocent souls of Bishops. Then the
most ingenious heads from all Europe would compete
in sending in their suggestions, and the right bait
might be discovered among them.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Seventeenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 5.</hi>&mdash;To supplement and partly to verify
the news in my last letter, I will now tell you some
facts that came to light yesterday and the day before.
</p>

<p>
The Opposition Addresses were presented to the Pope
on January 26, subscribed by forty-six Germans and
Hungarians, thirty French, and twenty Italian Bishops,
together with some of the North American Bishops, the
Portuguese, and certain others. Cardinal Barnabo had
employed all available means of intimidation to prevent
the Orientals from signing, and hence the number of
signatures was somewhat below what had been expected.
Of the Germans, Martin, Senestrey, Stahl and Leonrod
had signed the Infallibilist Address, which, as was only
afterwards discovered, has not been presented, because&mdash;it
was countermanded. It is not, as I first informed
you, composed by the Episcopal Committee, but by the
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
Jesuits, and emanates from the bureau of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>;
the abiding marvel is that 400 Bishops could be induced
to sign such a document without even verifying a single
one of the pretended facts cited in it. That an Infallibilist
should subscribe in blind confidence, and without
examination, a document coming from the Pope
himself, is natural; but that 400 pastors of the Church,
assembled for deciding and therefore for examining
ecclesiastical questions, should endorse on faith the
composition of a nameless Jesuit, is an occurrence the
Order may pride itself on.
</p>

<p>
A Petition has been set on foot by the Jesuits,
and hawked about with the Pope's approval, proposing
that the bodily Assumption of the Mother of
the Lord should be made an article of faith, and all
who henceforth doubt of it, or point to the notorious
origin of the notion from apocryphal writings, be anathematized.
This anathema would inevitably fall on
every one who is acquainted with Church history
and patristic literature. This passionate delight in
anathemas, curses and refusals of absolution has been
powerfully aroused, as you may see from the canons
which reproduce the Syllabus and are added to the
third <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>.
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
The augurs of the Gesù do not indeed smile, but simper,
when they meet each other, for they know that the rich
harvest from these seeds will drop into the bosom of
their Order. Here again it is shown plainly that the
interests of the Bishops and of the Jesuits are sharply
opposed.
</p>

<p>
That Bull, with its many curses and cases reserved
to the Pope, which fills the Jesuits with hope and joy
(though not they but the Dominicans of the Inquisition
are its authors), is for the Bishops a source of discouragement
and despair, so that the Bishop of Trent is said
to have lately observed that he would rather resign his
See than publish it. It is now asserted that the Pope
has again suspended it, partly on account of remonstrances
of the French Government, partly to put the
Bishops in better humour for the Infallibilist definition.
</p>

<p>
The Petition for the new Marian dogma had 300 signatures
on January 31. In managing such affairs the
Jesuits are unrivalled, for the Order is like a great
actor, such as Garrick, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, whose every limb from top
to toe moves, speaks, and conspires to express the
same idea. Then they have an Infallibilist Petition
from the East, the only one known to have been got
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
up; that is to say, they made the Maronite boys and
youths of their educational establishment sign the
Petition they had drawn up.
</p>

<p>
As I now hear, the majority, on January 25, resolved
to let their Address and Petition drop, if the minority
will accept Spalding's proposed addition to the third
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. They are indeed very magnanimous, for
that addition, as was observed just now, goes much
further and stands to the Address somewhat as Dido's
ox-hide cut up into thongs to the hide before it was
cut: it will embrace whole countries and cities. Spalding
desires too to have the Index placed completely
under the shield of Papal Infallibility, and therefore
the opinion that the Pope can have made any mistake
about the sense of a book is to be condemned.
Next day, the Petition of the minority, who knew
nothing of the decision of the other party, was presented
to the Pope and rejected by him. The
Infallibilists appear to have spread the report that
their Address had been actually given in simply
for the purpose of catching their opponents in a
trap.
</p>

<p>
On Sunday, January 23, the Commission named by
the Pope for examining motions proposed held its first
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
sitting, under the presidency of Cardinal Patrizzi and
not of the Pope himself, as was thought&mdash;seven weeks
after the Council met and when a number of motions
had long been awaiting its scrutiny. This delay had
evidently been designed. It has now been resolved to
arrange and examine proposals, not according to subjects
but nations, so that the proposals of the French,
Germans, etc., will be separately discussed and decided
upon.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Rauscher has written, or got written, a
treatise on the Infallibility question in German, which
is now being translated into Latin, and which does not
merely oppose the dogma as inopportune, but attacks
the whole principle and, as I am assured, on fundamental
grounds. But it cannot be printed here, where
the Roman censorship is constantly growing stricter.
It will be printed in Vienna, and copies will then have
to be sent here under cover to the Austrian Embassy.
To the representations of the German and French
Bishops against the oppressiveness and injustice to the
minority of the order of business, the Pope has not
seen fit to make any reply. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Væ victis!</foreign> Woe to them
who do not belong to the faithful and devoted majority!
This is what resounds here, morning, noon and night.
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
Meanwhile the Papal Committee of the Council has
devised a new means for paralysing the minority, and
cutting short discussions which might easily become
inconvenient. It is directed that all objections or proposals
for modifications of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> are first to be
handed over in writing to the Presidents and referred
by them to the Commission <hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi>, which rejects or
admits them at its pleasure. If the authors of the
proposals appeal against the decision of the Commission,
the whole Council decides, of course by simple
majority of votes. If this arrangement were really to
be introduced, the minority&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the German and
French Bishops&mdash;would be deprived of all possibility
of exerting any influence on the composition of the
decrees or warding off any decree they considered
injurious; they would always be outvoted, and the
Council would more and more take the form of a mere
machine for outvoting them. The Bishops would soon
learn to spare themselves the useless trouble of proposing
changes, and a much closer approach would be effected
to the great object of making new articles of faith and
decrees by a mere majority of votes. The only question
is what the French and Germans intend to put up
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
with from the Italians and Spaniards, for it is clear
that here again the question of nationalities turns up
in the background, and the Brennus sword of the
Southern and Latin majority is always ready to be
thrown into the scale.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Eighteenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 6.</hi>&mdash;The report of the dissolution or
prorogation of the Council gains in strength. Manning
has found it important enough to have it contradicted in
his journal, the <hi rend='italic'>Tablet</hi>. He writes, or makes somebody
write, <q>The Holy Father is full of strength and confidence,
and has no intention of proroguing the Council,
as his enemies say.</q> As far as the Pope is concerned,
I hold the statement to be true. Pius is still absolutely
confident of success and firmly convinced of two
things&mdash;<emph>first</emph>, of his divine, legitimate and irresistible
fulness of power, which requires that a conspicuous
example, memorable for all future ages, shall be made
of the Bishops who oppose him; <emph>secondly</emph>, of the
special protecting grace and guidance accorded to the
Council by the Holy Virgin, on whose benevolence
he notoriously maintains that he has very special
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
claims. He has issued an Indulgence for the whole
Church, which gives us some insight into his connection
of ideas and religious views. In the Bull of
December 1869, he says that the Dominican General,
Jandel, has represented to him that the new method of
prayer, consisting of 150 repetitions of the <q>Hail,
Mary,</q> was first introduced at the time the grand
crusade against the Albigenses was organized. But
our own age is infected with so many monstrous errors
that this new method of prayer should be employed
now also, in order that under the mighty protection
of the Mother of God the Council may destroy these
monsters. Whoever, therefore, after confession and
communion, recites the Rosary daily for a week, for
the Pope's intention and for the happy termination of
the Council, may gain a plenary indulgence of all his
sins, applicable also to the dead. The Pope adds
that even when a child, and far more as Pope, he has
always placed his whole confidence in the Mother of God,
and that he firmly believes it to be given to her alone
by God to destroy all heresies throughout the world.
How this special power of the Holy Virgin consists
with the fact that many heresies have now lasted
quietly for fourteen centuries, it would be interesting
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
to know. The rest the reader may find himself in the
German Pastorals.
</p>

<p>
Pius has even had his naïve but robust belief in his
own heavenly illumination and vocation to proclaim
new doctrines sensibly embodied in a picture. In a
chamber beyond the Raphael Gallery there is a picture
painted by his order; he stands in glorified attitude
on a throne proclaiming his favourite dogma of the
Immaculate Conception, while the Divine Trinity and
the Holy Virgin look down from heaven well pleased
upon him, and from the Cross, borne in the arms of an
angel, flashes a bright ray on his countenance. Thus
Pius stands in a special mystical relation to Mary; she
guides and inspires the Council through him, and he
in turn will proclaim, with its assent, the decrees she
has inspired and which will destroy the monstrous
errors of the present day, or will at least give them
a fatal blow. Unfortunately, not one single decree
has yet been brought out after exactly two months, and
all the heresies continue just as strong as before the
Council met. And yet the pregnant and successful
Councils of the ancient Church did not require a longer
time for their decisions; the Council of Nice was
finished in two months, the Council of Chalcedon in
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
six weeks. Certainly it was not then supposed that
Mary had first to give the Pope, and then he to give
the Council, the weapons for destroying heresies: they
were content to rely on the Paraclete promised by Christ.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the present assembly has nothing in
common with those ancient Synods, except in being
composed of persons called Bishops. But our Bishops
are unlike those of the ancient Church, for they have
to yield up to the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> three-fourths of the rights possessed
by their predecessors, and it would be simply
ridiculous to liken the state of tutelage and restraint
they are now placed under by the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> to the free
and independent attitude of the fifth-century Councils.
The more free-spoken among them have just addressed,
on 2d February, another Petition to the Pope, requesting
that the so-called Council Hall in St. Peter's may
be exchanged for a more suitable chamber; for now
that serious discussions on the dogmas and decrees are
to begin&mdash;and the third <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> will be met with
strong and persevering opposition in many of its
articles&mdash;the present arrangement becomes still more
intolerable than before. Any regular discussion is
simply impossible in the present Council Hall; there
is no doubt of that. <q>That is just right,</q> say the Papal
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
officials; <q>we neither desire nor need discussion, but
simply that the propositions should be voted.</q> <q>But
this is an unheard-of thing, against all conciliar usage
and all natural right,</q> reply the Bishops. Archbishop
Darboy said, <q>We are called on to anathematize doctrines
and persons; to pass sentences of spiritual death. But
would any jury in the world pronounce capital sentence
without first having heard the defence?</q> And
thus the Council has entered on a very critical period,
and a spirit of irritation is becoming visible, increased
by the constantly deepening conviction that the Bishops
are to be used for purposes alien to their minds and
suicidal. One word describes the entire plot&mdash;outvoting
by majorities. The united German, French
and North American Bishops are opposed to a well
disciplined army of about 500, who will vote as one
man at the beck of the Pope. This army consists
of 300 Papal boarders, the 62 Bishops of the Roman
States who are doubly subject to him, 68 Neapolitans,
80 of the Spanish race, some 110 titular Bishops without
dioceses, the Italian Cardinals, 30 Generals of
Orders, etc.<note place='foot'>It will of course be understood that the 300 boarders (cf. <hi rend='italic'>supr.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>)
are divided among the Prelates mentioned above.</note> In a word, the Latin South is arrayed
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
against the French and German North. And therefore
the design of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, to carry decrees or dogmas on
every question of Church and State, etc., by a mere
calculation of <emph>plus</emph> and <emph>minus</emph>, is doubly monstrous and
utterly unchurchlike. For, <emph>first</emph>, it must inevitably
produce a deep national irritation, if it is said hereafter
in Germany, Bohemia, Hungary, France and the United
States, <q>The Italians and Spaniards have triumphed over
our views and interests at Rome, simply because
their dioceses are much smaller than ours and they
have 50 Bishops for 100,000 souls, while we have only
one.</q> <emph>Secondly</emph>, it involves a complete break with the
past of the Church and the practice of Councils.
Some Bishops have examined the official records of the
Council of Trent by the Roman historian Pallavicini,
and have found there that Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> directed his Legates&mdash;and
that too with special reference to a decree on the
fulness of Papal jurisdiction&mdash;to make no decrees the
Bishops were not <emph>unanimously agreed upon</emph>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Istoria del Concilio de Trente</hi>, xix. 15. 3: <q>Facendosi quelle sole
difinizioni nelle quali i padri conspirassero ad un parere.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
But now just the contrary is to take place. The
decisive contest on that point&mdash;if it comes to an open
contest&mdash;will not be fought on the third <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>On
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
the Church and the Pope</hi>, but at once on the first <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>,
the handiwork of the Jesuits, when it is returned to
the Council, professedly modified but in substance
unchanged, from the Commission of two Jesuits and
three Infallibilists. As we hear, no attention has been
paid to the counter representations of the Bishops,
some of whom have objected to it altogether as superfluous
and mischievous, some as erroneous and exaggerated.
It will now without further discussion, which
is simply impossible in the Council Hall, be accepted
by the mere majority of votes of the compact troop of
Infallibilists, who are at the Pope's command as <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>valets
à tout faire</foreign>, and proclaimed as a dogma by Pius,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>approbante Concilio</foreign>, as the form runs. Thereby, according
to approved Roman doctrine, has the Holy Ghost
spoken by the mouth of His divine representative,
<q>causa finita est;</q> and it only remains for the 150 or
200 opposing Bishops to make all haste to perform a
great mental evolution, to change their laws of thought,
to reverence as revealed truth what they have hitherto
rejected as error, and to force the clergy and laity under
them by excommunication and suspension to perform
the same gymnastic feat of leaping at one jump from
unbelief into firm and immoveable faith.
</p>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<p>
The modern and purely mechanical scholasticism has
brought matters to such a pass that many seriously
look upon the Council as a machine, which only needs
turning to get new dogmas carried and authorized by
the Holy Ghost. Formerly, theologians used to say
that the voice of a General Council is nothing but the
voice of the whole Church concentrated in one place;
that every Bishop bears witness to the traditional belief
of his Church and of his predecessors; and that the
harmony of these testimonies proves what is the universal
belief, and thus attests the truth and purity of
the profession of faith sanctioned by the Council. But
now all this is entirely changed. The Bishops have
come, without any previous knowledge as to what they
were to vote about; long-winded and ready-made documents
are laid before them on questions most of them
have never examined in their lives, of which their
flocks at home know nothing and have never heard;
they are expected to pass decrees the necessity and
opportuneness of which appear to them highly problematical,
and to pronounce a string of anathemas,
because the Pope and Jesuits will it. They are cooped
up in a treadmill called a Council, and must willingly
or unwillingly grind what is thrown into it. It cannot
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
indeed be exactly said that this procedure is new and
unprecedented, for the same thing occurred, on a much
smaller scale, at the Fifth Lateran Council under Julius
<hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> and Leo. <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>; but then only the Italian Bishops were
made use of, who had long been broken in to the <foreign rend='italic'>rôle</foreign>
of flunkeys. Now, on the contrary, the Bishops of all
nations have been brought into prison at Rome, and
are to say Yea and Amen to the decrees the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and
the Jesuits have drawn up and mean to make obligatory.
</p>

<p>
But the minority have taken courage, and stand on
the defensive; and so the machine is at a standstill.
The opponents of Infallibilism have not decreased; on
the contrary, it is now thought that about 200 will vote
against it. Many, who at first were only <q>inopportunists,</q>
have now through more careful investigation
of the question become decided opponents of the doctrine
itself.
</p>

<p>
Antonelli does not spare assurances, that the Governments
may be quite at ease as to the decrees to be
issued by the Council; he says they only affect theology,
that nothing will be changed in practical life by them,
and that the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has no intention of employing them
for the purpose of interfering with political affairs.
But these reassuring declarations are only made orally;
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
great care is taken to avoid putting them into a written,
and therefore binding, form. Meanwhile the French
Government perfectly comprehends the situation and the
objects aimed at, and has already announced that it
will fully support its Bishops and protect them against
the threatened domination by majorities. Archbishop
Lavigerie has gained nothing in Paris, and the decision
of France has been communicated to the Cardinal
Secretary of State, to the effect that the Government
will not allow the 33 French Bishops and their allies
of the German and English tongue to be crushed and
forced into adopting dogmas they have rejected. The
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> has just been singing the praises of Count Daru,
who is a living proof that there are still real statesmen;
it will very soon adopt just the opposite tone.
</p>

<p>
Among the points which make the Bishops the more
astonished, the longer they stay here and the more
narrowly they inspect the condition of things, is the
decline of study in Rome, and the want, not merely of
learned men but even, and most especially, of well-grounded
theologians. Rome was never a favourable
soil for serious study and true learning; a resource
was found in attracting foreigners here, which could
easily be done by means of the great Religious Orders
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
whose Generals reside here. But now these Orders,
with the exception of the Jesuits, are in the same
state of decay. Where are men of distinguished learning
to be found among the Dominicans, Carmelites,
Cistercians and Franciscans of our own day? To the
Pope himself and those immediately about him this is
a matter of indifference; Pius feels instinctively that,
if there were real theologians at Rome, they would all
offer at least a passive resistance to his <emph>penchant</emph> for
creating new dogmas. Only the Jesuits and their
pupils favour that sort of thing; and as long as there
were real theologians in Rome, history knows of no
Pope who was possessed with this abnormal passion for
fabricating dogmas.
</p>

<p>
Now, indeed, among the 41 Italian Cardinals, only
two are named as theologians, the Thomist Guidi and
the Barnabite Lulio. Of the achievements of the
latter nothing is known, and he has left the Jesuits to
their own devices in the elaboration of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>;
but in the Council he is the chief representative of
Roman theology. More distinguished than Lulio is the
Piedmontese Prelate and Professor, Audisio, author of
a History of the Popes, which of course cannot be
measured by a German standard. Vincenzi, a good
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
Orientalist and author of a learned&mdash;but in the main
erroneous&mdash;apology for Origen, being a quiet, modest
man who goes his own way, is thought nothing of
here, and has neither title, dignities, nor benefices,
although in knowledge he outweighs twenty Monsignori.
De Rossi, the most acute and learned among
the genuine Romans, who has educated himself by the
study of German works, is a layman and therefore
cannot be anything. The Dominican Modena, Secretary
of the Congregation of the Index and as such
director of the whole institution, who died a few weeks
ago, passed here for a learned theologian, but no
monuments of his knowledge and research are extant
outside the Index. When a foreigner observed to him
shortly before his death that, in order to condemn
German or English books, one should understand something
of the language, he showed great surprise at so
unheard-of a demand, and replied that for Italians,
who notoriously far excel all nations in genius and
acuteness, if a foreigner translated a couple of passages
from a book into Latin or Italian, that supplied quite
enough materials for pronouncing a censure on the
book. The Dominican Gatti has now succeeded
Modena as Secretary of the Index, and therefore as
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
supreme judge <hi rend='italic'>ex officio</hi> of the literature of the world.
On his scientific capacity and literary achievements
history is silent. And so the few learned works produced
here have to be provided by foreigners domiciled
at Rome.
</p>

<p>
Theiner publishes documents from the Archives, so
far, that is, as they serve <q>the good cause;</q> much he
is notoriously forbidden to publish. The French
Benedictine, Pitra, now a Cardinal, edits the original
documents of Greek canon law; the French Chaillot
writes the single important Church journal or record,
<hi rend='italic'>Analecta Juris Pontificii</hi>, where, notwithstanding its
rigid Ultramontane line, useful collections or ancient
treatises not previously printed may here and there
be found. Dogmatics and theological philosophy&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
philosophy adapted to dogmatic needs and ends&mdash;are
provided here by the three German Jesuits, Schrader,
Franzelin and Kleutgen. For here Germans are only
thought available when they have first been transformed
into Jesuits and thereby, as far as possible, un-Germanized.
That Order, on which the features of the
Spanish national character of the sixteenth century are
still indelibly impressed, cannot tolerate a genuine German
in his natural shape; it would be compelled to eject
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
him as Etna vomited out the brazen slipper of Empedocles.
It is well known that the most industrious
and learned of the Roman Prelates, Liverani, was
obliged to leave Rome; he lives, I believe, at Florence.<note place='foot'>[Liverani published a striking pamphlet on the abuses of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
some years ago.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
If we examine the names of the Professors at the
Roman University of the Sapienza, we find among the
teachers of theology, with the solitary exception of
the Canon-Regular, Tizzani, who is now blind, only
monks&mdash;Dominicans, Carmelites and Augustinians&mdash;and
these mere names wholly unknown beyond the
walls of Rome. No less lamentable is the view presented
by the philosophical, mathematical and philological
departments. The best that can be said of this
University, the intellectual metropolis of 180,000,000,
is about this, <q>que c'est une fille honnête qui ne fait
pas parler d'elle.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the whole, the air here is much too raw, the
soil inhospitable, the Index too near, and the censorship
too merciless, for scientific works and serious investigations.
The Italians say of a mindless work,
<q>É scritto in tempo di Scirocco.</q> And here there is an
intellectual scirocco established in permanence. And
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
thus the brave German Benedictines, who assembled
here some years ago under an Italian Abbot, Pescetelli,
in St. Paul's without the Walls, have become
victims of the unhealthy atmosphere&mdash;that is, besides
the mental scirocco indigenous here, the sharp north
wind blowing from the Gesù. They had energetic
men among them, such as Nickes and others, were
anxious to work in German fashion, and made a good
beginning in a volume of <hi rend='italic'>Voices from Rome</hi>, published
in 1860; a German Cardinal was their protector. But
no sooner had they been denounced to the Pope by the
Jesuits&mdash;German and of ill-repute for orthodoxy are
synonymous terms here than they had to decamp.
The Abbot, weary of these chicaneries, resigned his
office and returned to Montecassino. But the Benedictines
generally are looked on most unfavourably by
the authorities here. As it was said in a capital
sentence at Paris, in 1794, that the condemned man
was <q>suspected of being suspected of deficient sense
of citizenship,</q> so must it be said of the Benedictines
here that they <q>are suspected of being suspected of
a deficient sense of Papalism.</q> They are not devoted
enough towards the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>; these little religious communities
cannot be so entirely kept in hand, the
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
Jesuits from of old are hostile to them, and it is found
in Rome that they have not hitherto rendered sufficient
service to the great cause of strengthening Roman
domination. They are therefore to be revolutionized,
and, like the Jesuits and the Mendicant Orders, to
receive a monarchical constitution. Their autocratic
General will then reside in Rome, and the Pope will
do with them what he did with the Dominicans, when
he made Jandel, the Jesuit pupil, their General. Then
the Benedictines will be for the Jesuits what the
Gibeonites were for the Israelites, their <q>hewers of
wood and drawers of water.</q><note place='foot'>Joshua ix. 21.</note>
</p>

<p>
Such a project for revolutionizing the Benedictines,
who would then of course cease to be sons of St. Benedict,
is reputed to be among the measures prepared for
the Council. If the present condition of Rome be compared
with earlier ages, as late as Benedict <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>'s reign,
or even twenty or thirty years later, there is truly an
enormous difference, and this deep decay and intellectual
collapse cannot be explained by external causes
merely; inward and more hidden motives must be
taken into account, which I think I well understand,
but will not here speak of. That does not trouble our
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
Roman clergy of to-day; they institute no comparisons,
and don't even know the names of the men who dwelt
in the same spot a century ago. And the thought of
their own poverty of intellect and culture, if it ever
occurs to the Roman clerisy, does not at all hinder
their always admiring themselves, like Dante's Rachel,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><q rend='pre'>Mai non si smaga</q></l>
<l>Dal suo miraglio, e siedo tutto giorno</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Ell' é de' suoi begli occhi veder vaga.</q><note place='foot'>Purgat. xxvii. 104.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Nineteenth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 8, 1870.</hi>&mdash;It is a most exciting drama that
is being exhibited here, and notwithstanding much that
is both little and painful in its details, one of great and
moving import; and those who have the opportunity of
inspecting its machinery more narrowly, can hardly at
times avoid feeling very strongly on the subject. The
figure of Laocoon, with the snakes coiled round him, is
constantly recurring to my mind; for I seem to be
witnessing the strategical arts and skilful evolutions of
a general, who is trying to surround a little band of
opponents with his immensely superior forces, so as to
compel them to lay down their arms and surrender at
discretion without striking a blow. The disproportion
is indeed enormous; first there is the Pope, whose mere
name still is a host in itself, and that Pope is Pius,
who for twenty-four years has had such homage and
flatteries heaped upon him as no Pope ever had before,
<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>
and who is accustomed to shake the Roman Olympus
by his nod. Then there are the Cardinals and Prelates,
the whole spiritual staff of Congregations&mdash;the Papal
family&mdash;all fully united and resolved, and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>contribuens
plebs</foreign> of foreign Bishops, who are fairly caught in
the net, and will not be suffered to escape without the
bonds and chains of the most stringent decrees securing
their obedience. On the other side stand from 150 to
200 Bishops, of divers tongues and nations and now for
the first time united by a common need and a common
danger, like a snowball liable to melt at the first breath
of milder air, and fighting like those Spaniards of the
Cortes, who, with one foot chained to a stone, compelled
the Mexicans to spare their lives. One asks every
morning in doubt and terror, how far the solvents employed
have attained their end? Many would gladly
capitulate if only they were met half-way by tolerable
conditions, and such would secure them a rather less cold
reception on their return to their dioceses. Meanwhile
the eyes and the hopes of all educated Catholics, not
only in Germany but in Italy, France and North
America, are fixed on the chosen band of 300 Bishops.
</p>

<p>
But how are matters likely to proceed? The Opposition
is tough and tenacious. Every new <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> bears
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
so unmistakeably the impress of the interests of either
the Jesuits or the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, that the Bishops cannot help
growing constantly more cautious, suspicious and reserved.
And to make their designs still clearer, the
Jesuits supply the practical commentary in their official
journal, the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, to the effect that no measures of the
Governments against the encroachments of the Church
on the civil jurisdiction, or her summons to transgress
the laws of the country, would bind the consciences of
their subjects. The subjoined anathema against every
one who refuses to acknowledge that laws are annulled
by the ordinances of the Church (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Pope),
is a sorry consolation for the Bishops; for experience
has shown too often that courts of justice and
statesmen don't trouble themselves about the excommunications
incurred in the discharge of their official
duties. The Bishops accordingly foresee nothing but endless
rubs and collisions with the civil power, as well as
with whole classes of the population at home; and
when the Jesuits are commended to them as pledged
and triumphant allies in the contest to be waged against
Governments, constitutions and laws, they generally
shake their heads suspiciously and with no particular
feeling of triumphant joy.
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
The Pope's 300 episcopal foster-sons cost him 25,000
francs daily, and that makes the pleasant little sum of
1,500,000 francs for two sterile months, during which
these doughty warriors have sat a good deal, but accomplished
nothing by their sitting; for the old Roman
proverb, <q>Romanus vincit sedendo,</q> has not been
verified here. The Pope is gradually getting frightened
at this daily expenditure, and, after the fashion of great
lords, who readily lay the blame of the failure of their
own plans on the bad advice of their subjects, he said
to-day, in an outbreak of disgust, <q>per furia di farmi
infallibile, mi faranno fallire.</q>
</p>

<p>
The proceedings of the Council must therefore be
expedited and curtailed. At the same time nothing
must be remitted of the matters it is to deal with and
vote into canons and decrees. Therefore the order of
business must be changed. Cardinal Antonelli says
now that <q>the speeches have been too long and too
many, and must be entirely put an end to; the
Bishops must be content with handing over their observations
in writing to the Commission of twenty-four
or the Commission for Petitions.</q> He tries to sweeten
the bitter draught to their lips by remarking that this
decision is for their own advantage, for, after being so
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
wearied out with the long sittings and listening to
speeches, they must be glad to be relieved of the burden.
The Bishops, however, experience no such joyful feeling,
but say that the last vestige of conciliar freedom is
now abolished. They have the more reason for saying
so, since it is notorious that the Infallibilist
and purely Romanist party is exclusively represented
on the Commissions, so that it may be clearly foreseen
that the remarks and suggestions of the liberal-minded
and reforming Bishops will simply be
thrown into the waste-paper basket, or, under the
most favourable circumstances, be buried in the archives
of St. Angelo. At the moment I am writing the new
<foreign rend='italic'>Regolamento</foreign> has not yet been published, owing to the
urgent requests and representations of certain Bishops.
But to judge from Antonelli's statement, the authorities
seem determined to drop the last veil, and show quite
openly to the world that the Council has been arranged
as a mere machine of Roman administration, and must
therefore of course be forced back into the path from
which it had wandered. Many a Bishop now looks
back with painful regret to the Council of Trent, where,
notwithstanding the haughty insolence of the Italians,
the ambassadors of Spain and France acted as protectors
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
to the foreign Prelates, and were a great check on the
arbitrary violence of the Legates. Now, Antonelli
assures every diplomatist who says a word on the unprecedented
method of procedure, and the hostile character
of the proposed decrees towards the State, that
these things have only a theoretical and doctrinal
significance, and that in practice the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> will study
a wise moderation, and place itself on a friendly footing
with the Governments. He means, that when one
fills one's arsenal with new and effective weapons, that
is no proof that they will at once be discharged. I
don't know whether this satisfies the diplomatists.
Perhaps Count Trautmansdorff is satisfied, for his
Government has repeatedly announced its resolve to
wait quietly till the Council is over and the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> is
put in possession of all the decrees and dogmas it
wants. Then, when the new doctrines are already
inserted in all the catechisms and taught in all seminaries
and enforced in every confessional, it will be time
enough to consider what line the civil power should
take in the matter. M. de Banneville and the Paris
Government do not seem to be of this opinion. I don't
imagine they are minded at Paris so entirely to sacrifice
the Bishops to the arbitrary will of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and its
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
paid majority, and for the last few days the French
ambassador has been engaged in a lively telegraphic
correspondence with his own Government. We may
very soon expect important disclosures.
</p>

<p>
As far as I can make out, the conviction still prevails
among the Roman clergy and their episcopal
allies that the dogma of Infallibility in the third
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> will be accepted by the Council, at least in a
somewhat modified form, but one easily capable of
being extended and quite sufficient for present exigencies.
They say, <q>We will first take the vote on the
question of opportuneness, and a mere majority may very
well decide that. It has decided already by the 400
or 410 signatures to the (Infallibilist) Address, and the
Bishops who have themselves answered No, will be
obliged to yield to this decision, and so to come to
the vote on the dogma itself, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to declare whether
they personally hold the Pope to be dogmatically
fallible or infallible.</q> The Romans expect that, when
matters have come to this point, not a few Bishops&mdash;especially
Ketteler of Mayence, and, it may be hoped,
many more with him&mdash;will come over to their side and
profess their faith in Papal Infallibility. In whatever
form they clothe their belief, it comes to the same thing
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
in the end. At last there will only remain a little band of
obstinate Prelates who will protest. They may talk if
they please, and then it will be proclaimed to the world,
by an overwhelming majority of perhaps 700 votes,
that it has become Infallibilist. Then might a new St.
Jerome say, with greater force than the former one said
of Arianism, <q>Miratus est orbis se esse factum infallibilistam.</q>
A Roman clergyman, who expressed this
expectation to me with peculiar confidence, added that
there had been a like occurrence at the Council of
Trent and it would now be repeated. I perfectly
understood him, and the matter deserves to be mentioned
here as a striking parallel to certain recurring
possibilities. The Council, which was meant to reform
and thereby to save the Church, was brought to an early
consideration of the universal neglect of Bishops to
reside in their dioceses and the need for recognising
this duty as one of Divine obligation. But it appeared
at once, in the first period of the Council, that the
Court of Rome and its faithful Italians in the assembly
had the strongest interest in preventing the assertion
of this simple and logically necessary truth. For, as
regards the past, it would have implied severe censure
of the practice followed by the Popes since the beginning
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
of the thirteenth century, which would be shown
to be a constant violation of the Divine law; while,
in regard to the present and future, it would have
seriously limited the plenary power of the Popes, for
it was always held a principle in the Church that no
one could dispense from the law of God. But the
non-Italian Bishops, and nearly all the Italians themselves,
were at first in favour of declaring it to be <q>the
Divine law,</q> so strong was the evidence. And it was
seen clearly enough that from the divinely imposed obligation
must again be inferred the equally divine rights
and institution of the episcopate. Meanwhile the Jesuit
General made his two famous speeches to show that
all episcopal authority was a mere emanation from the
Pope. For ten months, from September 18, 1562 to
July 14, 1563, all sessions of the Council had to be
suspended to prevent any decree being made on the
subject; and at last, on July 14, 1563, the twenty-eight
Spanish Bishops and <q>the Divine right of residence</q>
succumbed to the majority of 192 votes, about
three-fourths being Italians. <foreign rend='italic'>Absit omen!</foreign>
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> of February 5, 1870, in its article, <q>I
Politicastri ed il Concilio,</q> has supplied a noteworthy
commentary on the canons or decrees of the third
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, which affirm the Church to be an institution
armed with coercive powers of inflicting bodily punishments;
for that is obviously the meaning. The <q>Politicastri</q>
are those statesmen who imagine that the State
has a sphere of its own, independent of the legislation
of the Church and the interposition of the Pope. That,
according to the Roman Jesuits, is a most abominable
error. A law which contradicts a law of the Church
has not the slightest validity for men's consciences.
For the authority of a Council&mdash;and <foreign rend='italic'>a fortiori</foreign> of a
Pope, from whom, on the Jesuit theory, Councils derive
all their force and validity&mdash;is above the authority of
the State.<note place='foot'><q>Ove accadesse collisione tra le definizioni del Concilio ecumenico e le
leggi dello Stato, queste cesserebbero per ciò solo di avere <emph>qualsiasi</emph> vigore
obbligatorio,</q> p. 262.</note> Should the State therefore require obedience
to a law opposed to an ordinance of the Council,
it would do so without any real right (<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>senza vero titulo
giuridico</foreign>), and, should it enforce compliance, would be
introducing a suicidal tyranny. It is further explained
that this by no means applies to those religious laws
only which rest on Divine ordinance, but also to those
which are purely ecclesiastical, and therefore on Catholic
principles are variable.
</p>

<p>
Let us take the twelfth of the <hi rend='italic'>Canones de Ecclesiâ</hi>,
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
which anathematizes all who doubt the Church's power
to inflict corporal punishment; and consider further
that the Popes have most solemnly declared that by
baptism all heretics are become their subjects, are
amenable to the laws of the Church, and must, if
needful, be compelled to obey them.<note place='foot'>So Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>, in his Brief of 1791, directed against the new laws of the
French Assembly for securing religions freedom. Therein the distinction is
still drawn between heathen and Jews on one side and Protestants or heretics
on the other, that the former cannot be compelled to receive baptism,
but the others, <q>qui se Ecclesiæ per susceptum Baptismi Sacramentum
subjecerunt, cogendi sunt</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Collect. Brev. Pii VI.</hi>, Aug. Vindel. 1791, i. 34).
Benedict <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi> declared the same before in 1749 (<hi rend='italic'>Bullar. Mag.</hi>, Romæ, ed.
Coquel, T. xvii. p. 272). And Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> afterwards, in his Brief of 1803
(Kopp, <hi rend='italic'>Die kath. Kirche des 19 Jahrh.</hi>, Mainz, 1830, p. 429). <q>According
to Scripture, Councils and Tradition, heretics remain subject to the
laws of the Catholic Church.</q></note> Consider further
that the Syllabus condemns the toleration or equality
of different religions, and no doubt can remain as
to what system it is intended to introduce.
</p>

<p>
The second Letter of the famous Oratorian and member
of the French Academy, Father Gratry, has just come
here, and has produced a great impression. It treats
of the gross forgeries by which the way for the introduction
of the doctrine of Papal Infallibility has been
gradually prepared, first in the ninth and then in the
thirteenth century; and dwells especially on the fact that
the theologians&mdash;above all Thomas Aquinas, who rules
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
in the schools, and his many disciples and followers&mdash;were
deceived by these fabrications, and that even the
Popes themselves were misled by them. Gratry's exposition
is clear and convincing; but he goes beyond the
middle ages. He shows how dishonestly the Breviary
was tampered with at Rome at the end of the sixteenth
century, and how, up to the present time the Jesuits,
Perrone and Wenninger,&mdash;the latter in a truly amazing
fashion&mdash;have followed the practice of citing fabulous
or corrupted testimonies.
</p>

<p>
One grand result of the Council its authors have not
foreseen or reckoned upon, which, however, has already
attained alarming dimensions; I mean the scandal it
has given. They seem to have really believed with a
childish <foreign rend='italic'>naïveté</foreign> that the Council could be hermetically
sealed up, like birds under a glass bell, and its members
shut up apart,&mdash;that 3000 persons could be reduced
to silence by a Papal edict about matters they feel there
is the strongest necessity for speaking of. Such a
notion could only grow up in the heads of Roman
clerics, who are wont to look at the world beyond their
own narrow sphere only through crevices of the open
door, or through the key-hole. Only too much has become
known. The Jesuits, the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>, the
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Monde, et id genus omne</hi>, have done their best to reveal
the sharp contrast of opposite parties, and the world of
to-day, sceptically disposed as it is and little inclined to
cover the shame and nakedness by turning away its face,
is present at a double spectacle: it witnesses the system
of force and intrigue by which a Council is managed,
and it watches with keen observation the process of
manipulating a new dogma. Men say now, what Cardinal
Bessarion said before, according to an anecdote
current here, that the way Saints were canonized in his
own time made him very suspicious about the older Saints
and Canonizations. In the same way the Protestant
and Catholic laity, who are here in such numbers at
present, say, <q>We know and see now how matters are
managed in the Church when a new dogma is to be
made; what artifices, and deceptions, and methods of
intimidation are employed to gain votes. Must it not
have been the same at former Councils?</q> I have heard
even Bishops here say that such thoughts pressed upon
them, and were severe temptations against faith. And
if these things are done in the green tree, what shall be
done in the dry? Is it different with you in Germany?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twentieth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 9, 1870.</hi>&mdash;In commencing the discussion
on the Catechism the Council passed into the last stage
of the peaceful proceedings, which are to precede the
battle on the claims of the Roman authority. The
speech of Cardinal Rauscher, who is ill, was delivered
by the Bishop of Gurk, and made a great impression.
He was followed by Cardinal Mathieu, one of the best
Latinists in the French episcopate, the Primate of
Hungary and the Archbishop of Tours. After them
Dupanloup spoke, who was again, as on the former
occasion, not well heard. He lashed those who think
that the cultivated nations of the Catholic world are to
have a Catechism dictated to them by Rome. The
Session was not favourable to the propositions, but men
can no longer fix their minds on themes of lesser importance.
All are thinking of the decisive contest
which is imminent. Many indeed on both sides wish
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
that it could be avoided. The threatening attitude of the
policy of France has roused serious misgivings. It was
known in Rome at the end of January, but the decisive
instructions only arrived on Saturday, February 5, and
produced a deep and unpleasant sensation. Hitherto
the Court of Rome was able to hinder the withdrawal of
the French troops, by threatening to take refuge under
English protection at Malta; but with the good understanding
that now prevails between the French and
English Governments this is no longer possible. It is
perfectly well known in the Vatican that neither of the
two powers will stretch out a hand to uphold Papal absolutism.
It is a proof of the strong impression produced
by the French note that the Papal Court has kept it
secret. No appeal is tried to Catholic public opinion
or the loyal episcopate, for it is well ascertained that
the Infallibilist doctrine has very different enemies
from the temporal power. To Cardinal Antonelli it
seems like a denial of the whole work of his life to
stake the temporal power of the Pope for the sake
of a new dogma. But if this is to be saved, the dogma
must be sacrificed. So the Opposition now has the
assurance that the neutrality and non-intervention of
the Catholic powers is come to an end, and it is encouraged
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
at the same time by the part the learned world
has begun to take on its side, since the publication in
Germany of the addresses which attest the antagonism
of eminent Catholic scholars and professors of theology
to the new dogma.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless the minority is composed of heterogeneous
elements, and it may be safely calculated that
they will not all hold out to the last. Some opponents
of the definition are friends of the doctrine, and oppose
it on grounds not of a purely abstract or theological
nature. No one has calculated the numerical proportion
of these in inopportunists to the real opponents of
Infallibility. Any serious discussion of the question
has long been avoided, and many think it ought to be
avoided, because therein lies the dangerous weakness of
the party. The ground of inopportuneness, which had
already been adopted in the Letter to the Pope from
Fulda, was taken up from the first, in the hope of
paralysing the majority by an imposing number of dissentients.
They hoped to be strong by their numbers,
and to look strong by a certain kind of unity. The
theory of inopportuneness seemed to provide a common
ground for the decided opponents of the dogma and for
the timid and vacillating or moderate adherents of the
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
doctrine itself. That a really united Opposition has
been formed on this basis is mainly due to the Bishop
of Orleans. He attacked the opportuneness with such
a powerful array of testimonies in his famous Pastoral,
that every one saw clearly the doctrine itself was involved,
though he never entered in so many words on
the theological question. The position he provided has
served its purpose for two months, without the party
being brought to a declaration for or against the dogma.
It has served to bring in adherents to the Opposition,
who in the strictest sense of the word belong to the
Roman Court party, and to provide waverers with a
comparatively innocent method of resistance. It has
prevented the victory of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> in the days of their
greatest ascendancy, but it is untenable for a permanence.
The position of the inopportunists has the fatal
disadvantage that it can be out-flanked. That would
have happened, had the Bishops been separately requested
to give their opinions <q>sub secreto,</q> with a
promise that no public declaration in the Council
should be desired.
</p>

<p>
Then, again, it is a position that can easily be
mastered by means of the majority. A minority may
be invincible on the ground of dogma, but not of
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
expediency. Everything can be ventured to combat a
false doctrine, but not to hinder an imprudence or
a premature definition. In questions of faith one dare
not give in; not so in questions of discretion only.
And then the Council must have been sooner or later
driven from the ground of inopportuneness, if it was not
shipwrecked on the order of business; for it was a point
of view the decision could not finally hinge upon, in
presence of a preponderating majority.
</p>

<p>
The defection of part of the Opposition was thus only
a question of time, though it became more difficult for
individuals after each act done in union, and many an
inopportunist has advanced to theological contradiction
of the dogma. But the attempt to make the rejection
of the doctrine the principle of the party forced the
contrast more and more on the minds of individuals.
Among the Germans primarily, and in the groups of
leading Bishops from different countries who took
counsel together, a more determined spirit gradually
developed itself, and it was seen that their adversaries
made capital out of every sign of unclearness of view
among the Opposition. They were constantly spreading
reports that on the main point all were united, and
that at most there were not above twenty opponents
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
of the dogma, including only two Germans, who were
adherents of Hermes and Günther; perhaps only five
opponents in all, or none at all. In presence of these assertions
a public declaration seemed necessary, less for
the faithful at home than for non-Catholics, who ask
about the doctrine. The Bishops of the Opposition told
themselves that honour and episcopal duty demanded
that a Bishop should not withhold his belief on a
fundamental question, at a moment when all have to
speak, the moment of danger. The very success of the
inopportunist policy is no true success. It is no
victory of the truth, when it is not openly proclaimed
in the contest. Those who do not fight under the
banner of their own convictions are not on equal terms
with their adversaries.
</p>

<p>
Thus the view has been more and more making way,
that not only must every definition be avoided as dangerous,
but that the doctrine of the Roman theologians
and their adherents in the Episcopate must be rejected
as false. And this brought men more and more to the
scientific ground. It was no longer a mere affair of
personal conviction, but of direct evidence, and the
moment was come for literary argument to assert its
place in the proceedings of the Council. The position
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
of the mere inopportunists became more difficult, and
the band which held the party together was loosened.
Their adversaries at once zealously availed themselves of
this favourable crisis; nearly every Bishop of the minority
was plied with various intermediate formulas and
conciliar proposals. Attempts were made to sow disunion
among the leaders; political jealousies at home,
and whatever else could be made use of, were seized
upon to undermine mutual confidence. Some were to
be deceived by the phantom of a middle party, and were
told that they might take a position as peacemakers at
the head of a mediating section&mdash;of course in the anticipation
that every one who makes concessions and admits
the principle of the definition will pass over to the
majority. Against all these attempts the Bishops of
the minority have, on the whole, though not without
some wavering, kept firm and true. But still the
transition to the strictly theological standpoint, where
individual conviction on the question of Infallibility
must be decisively recognised and represented, cannot
be accomplished without an internal conflict and
shaking of the party.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-First Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 11, 1870.</hi>&mdash;When once literature began
to be brought to bear actively on the proceedings of the
Council, the crisis could not long be delayed, for science,
which has to do with truth only, knows nothing of
diplomatic considerations, and makes no concessions to
the requirements of the moment. It brings back the
discussion inevitably from theory to fact, from the
sphere of dogma to the sphere of history. In remorselessly
exposing the inventions and forgeries
which form the basis of the doctrine of Papal Infallibility,
it necessarily attacks the whole ultramontane
system of which that doctrine is the logical consequence.
The fundamental refutation of the dogma is
fatal to much in the specifically Roman theology and
the modern claims of the Popes, which would not
otherwise have been assailed in Council by any Bishop.
Those who shrink from collision with the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
would desire to spare it a public exposure of error
before the whole world, and who have therefore hitherto
remained on the defensive, will now be driven
further and placed in a position they would never have
chosen. They see their adversaries in a light&mdash;whether
as deceived or deceivers&mdash;which seriously disturbs their
daily intercourse with them. For it is no longer possible
to conceal by any periphrasis the fact that the spirit
the Opposition has to combat is no other than the spirit
of lying. And so, when the voice of honest science
cannot be excluded, no peaceful issue is possible. The
contest takes the form of an internecine strife against
that absolute Papal system for which the Court had at
first confidently expected to gain the almost enthusiastic
sanction of the Council. The aid of science can be
purchased at no cheaper price. No wonder then if the
Bishops recoil in trembling before the weighty task of
winning the victory for that view which specially prevails
among learned Germans of this day, first in the
Council, and then among the mass of the clergy and
the faithful. There are few among them who are not
inwardly conscious that they will themselves come in
for some of the heavy blows.
</p>

<p>
Father Gratry's first Letter on its arrival at Rome
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
roused serious reflection in many. His skilful handling
of a subject familiar to all, and his repeated application
of the solemn passage, <q>Numquid indiget Deus
mendacio vestro?</q><note place='foot'>Job xiii. 7.</note> together with his unmistakeable
allusion in his division of mankind into <q>viri veraces</q>
and <q>viri mendaces,</q> contributed to make clear the full
significance of the contrast&mdash;to many for the first time.
Döllinger's printed criticism of the Address was not calculated
to quiet the excitement it caused. The Roman
party, in the hope of effecting an internal split in the
party, seized the handle which Döllinger's statement
that he was in harmony on the main question with the
majority of the German Bishops seemed to supply, and
tried to extract a counter declaration from the Bishops.
The first attempt, to induce the Archbishop of Munich
to exert his authority, failed. Then the Bishop of Mayence
brought the matter before the Assembly of German
Opposition Bishops. He angrily disclaimed for
himself any solidarity with Döllinger's view, and averred
his belief in Papal Infallibility, saying it was only the
difficulty and danger of a dogmatic declaration quite
unnecessary in itself that made him an opponent of the
definition. Had his motion been accepted, and the
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
German Opposition renounced their hostility to the
dogma and retired to the ground of mere expediency,
the complete victory of the Infallibilists would have
been a matter of a few weeks only. But when the
German Bishops rejected Ketteler's urgent demand, and
decisively refused to give up their assault on the dogma,
the half-and-half character and weakness of their position
vanished, and they ceased to subordinate or
sacrifice the theological standpoint to the question of
expediency. And thus the difficult word has been
spoken; they have already pronounced against the
doctrine itself in the Addresses they have signed. The
reproach incurred thereby does not, of course, apply in
full force to the Bishop of Mayence, who has always
told his colleagues that he is on their side on the question
of opportuneness only. The Bishop of Rottenburg
(Hefele) has already declared in his speech at Fulda
that it is necessary to advance further and assail the
doctrine itself. And he repeated this in reply to Ketteler's
proposal. The great majority of the Bishops were
unfavourable to that proposal. While in this way
they testified their agreement with Döllinger, some of
them&mdash;especially Strossmayer&mdash;declared emphatically
for the œcumenicity of the Council of Florence. They
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
have weighty reasons for this. The more strongly the
minority hold to Döllinger's interpretation of the
famous Florentine decree, the less can they afford to
depreciate the authority of the Synod. For in their
opinion it is just that decree which serves to expose
the dishonesty of the other party, and to overthrow the
extreme doctrine. It will do them good service too in
the discussion on the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> and the new
<hi rend='italic'>Schema de Romano Pontifice</hi>, which is now announced.
</p>

<p>
But while the German Bishops rejected Ketteler's
proposal, and left to the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà Cattolica</hi> and the Mayence
<hi rend='italic'>Katholik</hi> the war against the Munich School, they
did not venture to come to an open breach with the
less homogeneous elements of their party, wishing to
retain Ketteler on their side&mdash;who is as zealous
against the Roman principles in Church and State as
against German science&mdash;as an active ally in the contest
against the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. For this end there have been
consultations, especially between the Archbishop of Cologne
on one side and the Archbishop of Munich on
the other. The commotion produced by Döllinger's
essay in the learned world of Germany gives them
an opportunity for helping the minority over this discomfiture,
and averting for the immediate moment of
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
danger the threatened disruption. It cannot be denied
that to a certain extent the latest declarations of German
Catholics are very acceptable to the Bishops, for
the very reason that they partly emanate from men who
belong to the more moderate opponents of Infallibility.
It is a piece of good luck for the Bishops staying at
Rome that men who are independent, and at a distance
from the flatteries and threats of the Vatican, undertake
to call things by their right names, that reason
makes itself heard by the side of passion, and science by
the side of authority. It is moreover very convenient
that the materials can be used while the writer is disowned.
But although the Bishops know well how to
value the importance of the support given to their
cause from Germany, yet this new movement is not
altogether to their taste; their dignity demands that
they should not succumb to pressure from without, or
owe too much to the public press. A Bishop is indeed
presumed to be a theologian. And as it is impossible
that the considerations which for the moment are
decisive in the Council should always be taken into
account by writers, there cannot fail to be manifold
embarrassments. From the intra-conciliar point of
view it is easy to go too far. And then it may be
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
regarded as almost inevitable that many Bishops should
receive these manifestations of opinion from Germany
with outward coldness, or reply by advising that it
should be left in their hands alone to secure the victory
of truth. In their eyes silence is in itself a kind of
vote of confidence. A too zealous participation might
almost look like a sign of doubt as to the Bishops
having strength and perseverance and coherence enough
to conquer. To be sure, none feel such doubts more
strongly than the Bishops themselves, but nothing can
better serve to give them the confidence in themselves
which is so much to be desired as showing them that
others feel it.
</p>

<p>
And thus among the German Bishops in Rome
Hefele's view has triumphed over Ketteler's, the
logical and decided over the half-and-half policy, and
the difficult turning-point has been passed without
loss or breach in the party. And not a day too soon!
Next week a new <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> and a new order of business
will bring the disunion and irritation in the Council to
a point.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Second Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 15, 1870.</hi>&mdash;If I wrote a fortnight ago
that the situation was essentially improved since the
first weeks, this must be taken with important reservations.
The most keen-sighted of the North American
Bishops then said, <q>We have done nothing at
all, and that is a great deal.</q> He thought it an
important gain that of the proposals laid before the
Council, the two <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>, nothing had passed, and
none of the objects for which it had been convoked
had, up to that point, been attained. But this has
only been the damming up of a stream which eventually
bursts through the more violently, and carries away
the dam with it. For the majority of 500, who are
resolved to indorse everything and vote every measure
proposed, holds firmly together, before and behind;
while the minority, on the other hand, is in danger of
being shivered to pieces on the rock of opportuneness.
</p>

<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> now under discussion, of a common
Catechism for the whole Catholic world, is clearly
connected with the general programme cut out for
the Council; for if the new dogmas are fabricated,
they will at once be inserted into this universal
Catechism, and thereby inculcated in the simplest and
most convenient manner on the youth and the whole
body of the faithful. The Jesuits have found the
experiment very successful in Germany with their own
Catechism, and have thereby naturalized the doctrine
of Infallibility gradually, with a precision rendered
more explicit in each successive edition in the boys'
and girls' schools, especially those conducted by nuns.
The Catechism has also proved a great financial success,
and thus whole countries have become tributary to
the Order. In the same way the new Catechism of the
Council will be a source of manifold profit to both the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and the Jesuits. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> treats the Council
with scientific skill, like a patient who has first to be
gently physicked, and then has stronger doses given
him by degrees. First came the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> of philosophical
and theological doctrine, then of discipline, and
now the question of a common Catechism. Behind
this looms the deeply-cutting <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on the Church;
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
and when that is triumphantly passed, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on
the Pope appears as the crown of the grand legislative
work. While the former tractate propounds the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>supremum magisterium</foreign> of the Church, as holding sovereign
power over lands and seas, souls and bodies, in the
last <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> this supreme <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>magisterium</foreign> crops out in the
person of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, who now enters into the possession
of the supreme dominion and powers marked out for
him in the dogmatic chart, if we can speak of any
marking out when, in principle, everything is laid
claim to, and the master himself alone and conclusively
draws the line of demarcation where he chooses. He
presents himself to the world as infallible teacher and
legislator in the realm of science, as supreme judge of
the literature of the world, as supreme lord and master
in all that pertains to religion, or is related to it, and
as infallible judge of right and wrong in all points.
Many will say with Polonius, <q>Though this is madness
there is method in it.</q> Let us examine these principles
more closely.
</p>

<p>
<emph>First</emph>, The Pope possesses the supreme and immediate
dominion and jurisdiction, not merely over the Church
in general, but over every individual Christian. Every
baptized person is directly and immediately subject to
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
the Pope, his ordinances, special commands and penalties.
His power is <q>suprema tum in Ecclesiam universalem,
tum in omnes et <emph>singulos</emph> Ecclesiarum pastores et <emph>fideles</emph>
jurisdictio;</q> or, as the twenty-one Canons say, <q>ordinaria
et immediata potestas.</q> Whoever disbelieves
this incurs anathema.<note place='foot'>The idea is thrice repeated; <q>fideles tam seorsim singuli quam simul
omnes officio ... veræ obedientiæ obstringuntur,</q> is said once again in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<emph>Secondly</emph>, The Church stands as high above the State
as heavenly beatitude above the profits and goods of
this earthly life.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Can.</hi> 13.)
</p>

<p>
<emph>Thirdly</emph>, Every one must therefore prefer the advantage
of the Church to the welfare of the State, <q>Si quando
videantur utilia regno temporali, quæ bonis sublimioribus
Ecclesiæ et æternæ salutis repugnent, ea nunquam
habebunt pro veris bonis, etc.</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Can.</hi> 13 ad fin.)
</p>

<p>
<emph>Fourthly</emph>, The supreme <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>magisterium</foreign> of the Church,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Pope, whether alone or in union with a
Council, has to decide what Princes and Governments
should do or leave undone in questions of civil society
and public affairs. <q>De ipsâ agendi normâ judicium,
quatenus de morum honestate, <emph>de licito vel illicito</emph>
statuendum est pro civili societate publicisque negotiis,
ad supremum Ecclesiæ magisterium pertinet.</q>
</p>

<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>

<p>
<emph>Fifthly</emph>, As the Pope possesses not only the supreme
office of teacher, but also the supreme right of coercion
and punishment, he not only distinguishes as teacher
what is and what is not permissible for States and
nations, but he can enforce his decision on political
matters by penalties upon every one&mdash;be he monarch
or minister or private citizen. He has the right
<q>devios contumacesque exteriori judicio et salubribus
pœnis coërcendi atque cogendi.</q>&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Can.</hi> 12.)
</p>

<p>
<emph>Sixthly</emph>, Whenever a law of the Church conflicts with
a law of the State, the latter must give way; and
whoever maintains that anything forbidden by the
law of the Church is allowed by the law of the State
incurs anathema.&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>Can.</hi> 20.)
</p>

<p>
These ecclesiastical maxims, which deprive the laws
of the land of all force and of all obligation for the
conscience, are partly those already in existence, partly
those any Pope may issue hereafter whenever it pleases
him.
</p>

<p>
Thus marriage, primary instruction and education,
the toleration or suppression of dissenting communions,
the jurisdiction and privileges of the clergy, the acquisition
and control of ecclesiastical property, oaths, wills,
and the whole of the unlimited domain taken into her
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
hands and legislated for by the mediæval Church, and
in short whatever comes under the head of permissible or
forbidden&mdash;this, <foreign rend='italic'>en masse</foreign>, forms the sphere of the Pope's
jurisdiction, wherein he rules with absolute and sovereign
power, and puts down all opposition by coercion
and punishments. Truly this reminds one of the
Prophet's words, <q>The bricks are fallen down, but
we will build with hewn stones; the sycamores are
fallen, and we will plant cedars in their place.</q> Since
Paul <hi rend='italic'>iv.</hi>'s time, 260 years ago, no Pope has so openly
and undisguisedly spoken out the thoughts and wishes
of his heart. The kernel of the doctrine, then, is this:
there is on earth one sole lord and master over kings
and subjects alike, over nations as over families and
individuals, against whom no right or privilege avails,
and whose slaves all are. The only difference is that
some, viz., the Bishops, can on their side rule and lord
it in their dioceses as upper servants in the name of the
Church or the Pope, so far as their master does not
interfere to stop them, while all others are mere slaves
and nothing more. This obviously goes far beyond
the Syllabus. This is the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi>
modernized and, so to speak, translated out of military
language (about the two swords) into political and juristic
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
terms. Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, and Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>,
said that, <q>ratione peccati,</q> they could interfere anywhere,
and bring any affair or process before their
Court, for it belongs to the Pope to decide what is sin
and to punish it. What is said here comes to the
same thing, that the Pope determines what is or is not
allowable, and acts accordingly.
</p>

<p>
It is a stately edifice of universal Papal dominion
whereon the keystone of Infallibility, which bears and
upholds the whole, is to be placed, so that every command
and ordinance of the Pope, even in political
matters, is infallible, as the Jesuit Schrader has so
clearly and forcibly pointed out. And to this must be
added further (according to Canon 9) a vast and infinite
domain for infallible decisions, viz., <q>all that is requisite
for preserving the revealed deposit in its integrity.</q>
Who can specify what is included here, or fix any limits
to it?
</p>

<p>
Two other links in this world-embracing chain are
not visible, which are yet necessary for its coherence.
The Interdict, which robbed whole populations of divine
service and sacraments, must be restored in its ancient
splendour, and the Pope's right to dispense from oaths
must be distinctly asserted.
</p>

<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>

<p>
The Fathers of the Council have daily opportunities
of feeling how useful the temporal power is for the
plenary jurisdiction of the Papacy. Were they assembled
anywhere else than in Rome, there would be
the possibility of holding a real Synod in the sense and
manner of the Ancient Church, while the so-called
Synod in Rome is in fact the mere painted corpse of a
Council laid out on a bed of state.
</p>

<p>
Soul and freedom are wanting. On any other soil
than that of the States of the Church, the Bishops could
assemble in a room where they could debate and understand
one another, while they are now forcibly detained
in the Council Hall. They could come to a mutual understanding
by means of the press, by printed proposals or
statements of opinion, weekly reports and the like.
Anywhere else such treatment as the Patriarch of
Babylon experienced would have been impossible; he
has now taken refuge under the protection of the
French Embassy. But here the King of Rome lends to
the Pontiff the means of enforcing unreserved submission,
and it is like the lion's den, <q>vestigia nulla retrorsum.</q>
</p>

<p>
Many a French Bishop has shared the experiences
of the famous Lamennais thirty-eight years ago, who
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
came to the Eternal City full of ardent devotion to the
Chair of Peter and firm faith in its infallibility, and on
his departure, after a long stay there, wrote to a friend,
<q>Restait Rome; j'y suis allé et j'ai vu là la plus infame
cloaque qui ait jamais souillé les regards humains.</q> I
will not transcribe what follows, though it was lately
read to me by a Bishop. It may be seen in his Letters.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Correspondance</hi>, Paris, i. 247.</note>
But this I can testify: there are men in the French
Episcopate who used to be zealous champions of the
temporal power, but who would now bear its loss with
great equanimity, if only the calamity of the decrees
chartered for the Council could be thereby warded
off.
</p>

<p>
Yesterday, February 14, the ice was broken at last.
The Bishop of Belley for the first time mentioned the
Infallibility doctrine in the General Congregation, observing
that the Council should at once proclaim it
and go home, as that was the only object they had
been summoned to Rome for.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile an instructive calculation has been made
of the proportion in which the different nations and
Catholic populations are represented in the Council.
It appears from them that the Catholics of North Germany
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
have <emph>one</emph> vote in Council for every 810,000 souls,
and those of the States of the Church for every 1200, so
that one Roman outweighs 60 Germans. It has been
further ascertained that the 512 Infallibilists in the
Council represent a population of 73,011,000 souls,
while only 94 opponents of the dogma represent
46,278,000. With the Infallibilists one vote represents
142,570, with the Opposition, 492,320 souls.
</p>

<p>
Austria has now announced by her ambassador, Count
Trautmansdorff, that the Government will not allow
decrees in contradiction with the Constitution to be
promulgated in the country. This threat will produce
little effect, for all the doctrinal decrees have full force
throughout the whole Church from the mere fact of
being promulgated at the Council; only the disciplinary
regulations require to be promulgated in the various
countries and dioceses. Thus the Council of Trent has
never been promulgated in France, notwithstanding all
the endeavours of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, but the dogmatic decrees
have always been in full force there as elsewhere.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Third Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 16, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The order of business is now
to be altered, which means that an end is to be put to
the speeches. The Bishops are to hand in their views,
scruples and suggestions in writing to the Commission for
revising motions, which will use its own discretion as to
noticing or leaving unnoticed the proposals made with
a view to their being submitted to the Council. There
will then, in place of a discussion, be a mere voting,
which individuals may give their reasons for, if they
have previously stated the particular point they wish
to speak on and obtained leave for it. And in the new
order of business, the Pope's right to make and promulgate
decrees on faith with a mere majority is said to be
emphatically laid down. When this and the anticipated
and dreaded <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> <q>On the Pope</q> are promulgated,
we shall see what attitude the Bishops will
assume towards them. Both are now suspended like
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
two swords over the heads of the Fathers. All at last
depends on whether the Opposition remains compact,
or crumbles to pieces under the efforts of the curialists.
</p>

<p>
If the general war required by the principles of the
new <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> against modern systems and governments,
which conflict in numberless cases with the laws of the
Church, is to be undertaken, the question arises, Where
is the army to carry it on, and what weapons are to be employed?
No doubt the trumpeters of the army are ready
at hand, viz., the Jesuits of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> and the monastery
of Laach, but it seems a doubtful look-out about
soldiers. The Jesuits, indeed, command at present a
considerable number of distinguished and wealthy
females, but that will not go far in the great contest
against laws, parliaments and governments. The Pope
himself must principally supply the arms, which can
only be the old ones of excommunication, interdict and
processes of the Inquisition. Excommunication was
formerly very effective, when the excommunicated
could be proceeded against as heretics after a twelve-month,
but that is no longer feasible. Interdict, too, is
become a blunted instrument, which no Pope has ventured
to make use of since Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> succumbed in his
battle with Venice. The Inquisition only survives now
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
for the 700,000 souls of the present States of the Church.
That drastic means of giving up refractory populations
<foreign rend='italic'>en masse</foreign> to slavery and spoliation, as applied by Clement
<hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, Nicolas <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, Julius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>, and Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, cannot
easily be adopted now. So they will be content for the
time with establishing the principle, and must await
more favourable circumstances for realizing it. But
the Bishops are between two fires: they are discredited
with Rome, because they must continue to acknowledge
the civil laws, which are in fact condemned; they are
exposed with their Governments and people to the constant
suspicion of being on the watch for some political
complication to secure the triumph, at least in particular
cases, of the ecclesiastical principles recognised as valid
at Rome&mdash;in other words, the Decretals&mdash;over the laws
of the State.
</p>

<p>
It seemed to me important to ascertain more precisely
the attitude of the Dominicans&mdash;who are still a
powerful corporation, through their possessing such influential
offices as the Inquisition, Index, Mastership of
the Sacred Palace, etc.&mdash;towards Infallibilism. They
have always been the standing rivals and opponents of
the Jesuits, and before 1773 were often able to resist
them successfully. Now, of course, everywhere out of
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
Rome, they are out-flanked and repressed by the Jesuits,
while in Rome they have no influence with the Pope.
Yet they too are all decided Infallibilists, and that
because of their great theologian, Thomas Aquinas.
That he himself became implicated in this notion only
through means of the forgeries in Gratian, and of another
great fabrication, with spurious passages of the
Fathers, specially devised for his own benefit, they
neither know, nor are willing to believe when told of it.
They say they have once sworn to the doctrine of St.
Thomas, and must therefore adhere to the Infallibilist
doctrine introduced by him into the schools, to avoid
perjury.<note place='foot'>[A writer in the Cologne <hi rend='italic'>Rheinischer Merkur</hi> of May 14, a newly
started organ of Liberal Catholic principles, conducted entirely by priests,
learnedly discusses the question <q>whether St. Thomas Aquinas taught
Papal Infallibility,</q> and comes to the conclusion that, in spite of the
influence of these forged authorities on his mind, he did not.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
A certain feeling of discouragement betrays itself
among many Infallibilists, and there is much in the
occurrences of the last few weeks to account for it.
Thus the Archbishop of Milan, whose diocese nearly
equals in extent the whole States of the Church, has
received an address from his clergy and people expressing
agreement with his work against the dogma, which
has greatly rejoiced him. And the news of the state of
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
feeling in Germany is disheartening. Golden results
had been reckoned on from the efforts of the Jesuits
and their pupils there for the last twenty years. It
was supposed here that a very considerable number of
people beyond the Alps must be inspired with zeal for
Papal Infallibility. When the impulse given by Döllinger
evoked so many and such weighty expressions
of opinion on the other side, it was confidently expected
in Rome that a strong popular demonstration in favour
of the dogma would burst out, like a mighty hurricane,
from every district in Germany, as the 800 Jesuits at
work there would easily be able to bring that to pass.
But now it is evident that no single man of influence
in the whole country will make himself responsible by
name for this opinion, and that all who are eminent
for authority and knowledge&mdash;especially historians and
theologians&mdash;protest against the proposed new dogma.
Even the Jesuit Catechism has not been able to effect
everything in this respect. Can a new dogma be fabricated
for Spaniards, Italians and South Americans
exclusively? And even in North Italy an opposition
is being manifested. It is a questionable policy to
show to the German people so openly the gulf between
their religious thoughts and desires and those of the
<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>
Latin nations, and even to widen that gulf. And in
what position would the episcopal signataries of the
Fulda Pastoral find themselves, after giving such an
explicit assurance to Catholic Germany, <q>that the
Council would establish no new or different dogmas
from those already written by faith on the hearts and
consciences of all German Catholics</q>? The faith and
conscience of the German Catholics, both theologians
and laity, have now spoken loudly and unequivocally
enough. And it is utterly impossible for a German
Bishop to return home from the Council with the new
dogma ready-made in his hand, and say to his flock, like
St. Paul, <q>Ye foolish Germans, who hath bewitched you?</q>
<q>You don't know yourselves what you have hitherto
held in your faith and conscience. See, here is the
true bread for your souls, just brought fresh from the
bake-house of the Council. This is what you ought long
ago to have believed; be converted, and confess that to
be white which you have thought was black, and that
to be a divine truth which you have taken for an invention
of man.</q> It cannot be presumed that a Bishop
would willingly contemplate exposing himself to the
ridicule of all Germany.
</p>

<p>
The rumour of a speedy prorogation of the Council
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
is constantly growing more definite. As this depends
on one capricious will, it is quite possible in itself.
But some striking result would have first to be attained,
some conspicuous act accomplished by the Council;
or else the fraud would be too glaring, the nakedness
of the land too strikingly exhibited to the whole world.
To the question, why ten precious weeks had been idly
wasted without a single decree being achieved, the
only answer would be, that the desire to deprive the
Council of all independent action had led to the machine
being cramped and fettered till it was brought to a standstill
altogether. In accordance with the advice of the
Jesuits the whole Council had in fact been pre-arranged,
and nothing was to be left to the Fathers on their
arrival at Rome but to affirm the thoughts and formulate
the decrees suggested by others. The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> prepared
shall be read one after the other, and the Fathers
shall say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>, and to prevent their having any temptation
to criticise and mangle and curiously dissect and
combat the motions laid before them, the Sessions shall
be held in a Hall where the speeches cannot be heard,
and all discussion is impossible. That was the programme;
the result has proved that the Court had
judged rightly of about 500 out of the 700 members,
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
but had deceived itself as to the remaining 200.
Veuillot, who communicates the correct views about
the Council daily to the French, has declared that it
was right to deprive the Bishops of the freedom of evil
(<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>qu'il ne fallait pas laisser aux Évêques la liberté du
mal</foreign>). This beneficent care for the health of the Bishops'
souls has however been extended a little too far. Many
of them are so ungrateful as to think they are treated too
much like automatons, and that with the <q>liberté du mal</q>
they have also been deprived of the <q>liberté du bien.</q>
The Roman lists of names from which the Commissions
had to be chosen are not forgotten. The right of
proposing motions has been made illusory by the composition
of the Commission appointed for examining
them, and the arrangement for making the permission
to bring them forward dependent on the pleasure of
the Pope. And thus great uneasiness, not to say
exasperation, prevails among the 200 Bishops. And
on the other hand, the Pope has been for several weeks
past in a chronic state of mingled indignation and
astonishment at finding so many Bishops&mdash;even at
Rome, in his own immediate neighbourhood&mdash;daring to
think and say the contrary to what he, Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, thinks
and says.
</p>

<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>

<p>
This rebellion of thought has not indeed yet been
directly and openly manifested in the Council Hall.
But when the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>, and with it Infallibility,
really come to be discussed, then even within the
sacred precincts of St. Peter's, and close to the Tomb of
the Apostles&mdash;which the Pope had assured himself
would inspire very different thoughts into the Bishops'
heads&mdash;bold utterances of contradiction will be heard,
and will resound throughout Europe, for <q>publicity
discloses the Acheron of the Council.</q> The expected
and decisive sealing up of 3000 mouths is at an end
once for all, and even that most correct and devoted of
Romanists, Veuillot, has declared in his <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> that
such a silence of the grave is impossible, especially for
the French, and has accordingly blurted out such of
the secrets of the Hall as seemed to him desirable
without scruple. Nor have the authorities taken it at
all ill of him. But to hear Bishops publicly in Council,
and in the hearing of the Papal Legates, proclaiming
views diametrically opposed to those of the Pope&mdash;and
that, too, in a question so fundamental and so
completely dominating the whole future life of the
Church&mdash;would be a scandal which must be averted
even at the heaviest cost. Some time before the Indiction
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
of the Council, in 1866, Pius himself formally
asserted, in the most significant terms, and in presence
of a numerous assemblage of foreigners who had come
to offer him their homage, his true attitude towards the
world and the Bishops, whether assembled or dispersed.
He spoke in French, and in words carefully
prepared beforehand, and I give the speech precisely as
it was reported, with the reporters' names subscribed, in
the <hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Union</hi>, and the <hi rend='italic'>Observateur Catholique</hi>
of April 1, 1866, p. 357:&mdash;<q><emph>Seul</emph>, malgré mon indignité,
<emph>je suis le successeur des apôtres</emph>, le vicaire de Jésus
Christ; <emph>seul</emph>, j'ai <emph>la mission de conduire et de diriger la
barque de Pierre, je suis la voie, la vérité, et la vie.</emph> Il
faut bien qu'on le sache, afin de ne pas se laisser tromper
et aventurer par la parole de gens qui se disent Catholiques,
mais qui veulent et enseignent tout autre chose
que ce que veut et enseigne l'Église.</q>
</p>

<p>
Whether he really intended thereby to deny the
office of the Bishops as successors of the Apostles,
which has always hitherto been recognised in theology,
I cannot say. But this much is clear, that every
Bishop who in any important question of faith differs
from the views of Pius, departs from <q>the way,</q> swerves
from <q>the truth,</q> excludes himself from <q>the life.</q>
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
Nothing of the sort has ever been suffered at Rome; no
dissent has ventured into the light of day. The censorship
and the Inquisition have taken care of that.
It would be a supremely dangerous precedent if that
were now to happen for the first time, and with many
Bishops of different nations for the dissidents. The contradiction
between the Liberal Bishops and the Pope would
be the more glaring, as Pius has only in the last few
days addressed a very categorical letter to the Liguorian
Jules Jacques on his own infallibility. He praises this
man for having collected from the writings of Liguori
his statements about Papal Infallibility, and thus exhibited
the <q>sound doctrine.</q> The <q>unsound</q> doctrine
cannot be freely proclaimed in St. Peter's, and besides
it has such a peculiar power of infection, that for centuries
Rome has surrounded herself with a threefold
<foreign rend='italic'>cordon</foreign> and all sorts of disinfecting remedies against
this epidemic. And accordingly, from the Roman
standpoint, the adjournment of the Council must obviously
appear to be in any case the lesser evil in comparison
with so unheard-of a scandal. Just think of a
philippic in the Council Hall against the infallibility of
the Pope, an exposure of the errors of Popes&mdash;there in
St. Peter's, close to the Vatican, and before 700 Prelates!
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
That would indeed be, in the words of Daniel,
the abomination of desolation in the holy place.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, an adjournment and subsequent reassembling
would have this advantage, that the order of
business and the locality could be changed. So
long as these remain unchanged, it is impossible to
speak seriously of a Council, and if the Roman censorship
prevents any complaints on the subject being
heard, the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> cannot conceal from itself that after
the close of the Council the real state of the case will
be universally recognised as a notorious fact, and the
entire want of freedom or examination or discussion
be insisted upon as a ground and justification for rejecting
the decrees. But a Council universally questioned
or rejected would be an endless source of
embarrassment and distress for the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> themselves.
They would have at last to exclaim, <q>All I have gained
is a loss.</q>
</p>

<p>
These and the like thoughts are now occurring to
many. The advice of the French Government, which
would on all accounts gladly welcome an adjournment,
the admonitions of Austria, which has at last, at the
twelfth hour, receded from its attitude of coldness and
indifference, and the knowledge that the two Protestant
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
powers, Prussia and England, maintain the same views
on the threatened decrees and intended ecclesiastical
conquests, though without making any direct representations
on the subject&mdash;all this more or less contributes
to the gravity of the crisis. There are some drops of
wormwood mingled with the joyous goblets quaffed
daily to the Pope by the majority of 500 obsequious
and courtly Latins. As the obedience of these
Bishops and the Vicars-Apostolic, who can at any
moment be deposed by Propaganda, is unlimited, they
will vote the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> exactly as the Pope desires;
but most of them do it at least with an inward repugnance,
and say, like the Aragonese Cortes of old, <q>We
obey, but we don't execute.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Fourth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 20, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The following classification of
the French Bishops here according to their parties may
be interesting.
</p>

<p>
The French themselves distinguish three factions,
Liberal, Ultramontane, and the Third Party&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, those
who have signed no address, and have openly refused
to do so. To the Liberal section belong Alby, Gaz,
Marseilles, Nizza, Cahors, Mende, Perpignan, Bayonne,
Montpellier, Valence, Viviers, La Rochelle, Luçon,
Besançon, Metz, Nancy, Verdun, Annecy, Autun, Dijon,
Grenoble, Paris, Orleans, Rheims, Chalons, S. Brieux,
Vannes, Bayeux, Coutances, Evreux&mdash;thirty votes altogether.
</p>

<p>
The Ultramontanes are&mdash;Rodez, Aire, Nîmes, Angoulême,
Poictiers (in the superlative), Belley, St. Diez,
Strasburg, Le Puy, Tulle, St. Jean de Maurienne, Langres,
St. Claude, Blois, Chartres, Meaux, Versailles,
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
Amiens, Beauvais, Rennes (a malcontent Ultramontane),
Seez, Moulins, Toulouse, Carcassonne, Montauban,
Laval and Le Mans&mdash;twenty-seven votes.
</p>

<p>
In the Third Party, headed by the Cardinal-Archbishop
of Rouen, are included Périgueus, Bourges, Tarantaise,
Cambray, Arras, Nevers, Troyes, Pamiers, Tours&mdash;ten
votes.
</p>

<p>
The Bishops of Digne, Fréjus, Toulon and Soissons
are described as doubtful.
</p>

<p>
The English Bishops are similarly divided. Manning
has only been able to get one single Bishop over to his
side. Two, Errington and Clifford, have signed the
Address against Infallibility. Six, including Bishop
Ullathorne of Birmingham, form a third party, who
decline to sign anything on either side. It is the same
with the Irish Bishops. The Romanized Cullen, whom
the Pope forced as Primate on the Irish Bishops, with
the same view as he imposed Manning on the English
Bishops, against their will, is of course an Infallibilist,
and would rejoice to enforce this dogma, which they
detest, on the educated classes of Ireland by the help
of the lower orders. Bishops Moriarty and Leahy (of
Dromore) have signed the Petition against Infallibility.
Archbishop MacHale of Tuam, and some others with
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
him, belong to the third party, while the majority of
the Irish Bishops see in Papal Infallibility a means for
increasing their influence over the people. What view
the South Italian Bishops take is illustrated by the following
anecdote. An Italian statesman spoke to two
of them about the immoderate claims contained in the
<hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>, and asked them whether they really
meant to assent to such decrees? <q>We cannot go
against the Holy Father,</q> was their reply. When he
reminded them of the independent attitude of the
German Bishops, they replied, <q>They can take that
line, for they are rich.</q> Another of the South
Italians amused the Council by urging that the constant
wearing of the long cassock should be enforced,
because Christ rose and ascended into heaven in that
dress.
</p>

<p>
Since the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> has been in the hands
of the Bishops, it is clear to all that the Council has
been convoked simply for the purpose of extending the
power of the Pope and strengthening the influence of
the Jesuits, and that everything is designed to subserve
this one end. The Bishops are to forge chains for binding,
first the secular powers, and then themselves and
the whole clergy with them. The feeling they are
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
possessed with is a bitter and painful one. They feel
outwitted and caught in a trap. They were summoned
to Rome, without being told a word of the objects aimed
at or the matters to be dealt with; on their arrival
they were strung and fixed, like the keys of a harpsichord,
into the great conciliar instrument, and they
find that they are to be used by the hand of the mighty
musician to produce tones which sound to themselves
most utterly nauseous. They know well enough that
the most eloquent speeches and most forcible arguments
don't change a single vote of the majority,
who would remain firm and unmoved as the rock
of Peter if a Chrysostom or Augustine was among
them. In an outburst of disgust at the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de
Ecclesiâ</hi>, a German Prelate, formerly Roman in his
sympathies, exclaimed, <q>This <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> deserves to be
thrust down into hell.</q> One hears these men congratulating
their colleagues who stayed at home under
a presentiment of what was coming. The news of
the adjournment of the Council, begun under such
evil auspices, would be welcomed by them with
delight.
</p>

<p>
But these reports of an adjournment are rather
wishes than hopes. The prorogation would imply an
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
admission that the Council had been a failure through
the fault of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, in the perversity of the regulations
it imposed on the Bishops, and the extravagance of the
measures it brought forward. <q>Perissent les colonies
plutôt qu'un principe</q>&mdash;this saying, uttered in the Paris
Convention of 1793, may often be heard here in various
applications. The world will be enlightened in a few
days by the publication of the new or altered order of
business. It is not prorogation that is the immediate
business, but the subjection of the minority more than
ever to the rule of the majority and its wire-pullers
who stand behind it, the outvoting them by majorities.
</p>

<p>
In French circles a paper called the <hi rend='italic'>Moniteur Universel</hi>
is making no small sensation. It contains a detailed
account of the proceedings of the Council, drawn
up by a learned Frenchman residing here and under
the inspiration of French Bishops. It is thoroughly
authentic and carefully weighed&mdash;far the best and most
accurate account of the Council in that language. You
may perhaps find room for the following, which substantially
confirms and partly supplements and rectifies
my own statements:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Council of Trent arranged the order of business
for itself. In this case just the contrary has been
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
done: everything was pre-arranged and imposed on the
Council by the Pope, and even the secretaries and scrutators
were named beforehand. No initiative is allowed to
the Bishops; the Commission for examining motions
is formed of the hottest Infallibilists and members of
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, but the final decision is reserved to the Pope.
The proposers of a motion are not even allowed to explain
and defend it, so that the freedom nominally conceded
to the Bishops of proposing measures is rendered purely
illusory. By the composition of the four Commissions,
elected from Roman lists of names, all work of critical
importance is kept in the hands of the few Infallibilists
chosen for the purpose by the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, to the exclusion
of 700 Bishops, among whom are all the German Bishops
who signed the Fulda Letter to the Pope, and the most
influential French Prelates. In short, all Bishops not
known to be thorough-going Infallibilists have been
systematically excluded from the Commissions. Very
different was it at Trent, where all the Fathers, divided
into four Congregations, took a real part in the work.
We must add the monstrous disproportion of national
representation&mdash;the enormous and overwhelming preponderance
of the Italians, still further strengthened
by the host of Vicars-Apostolic, who can at any
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
moment be deposed by the Propaganda without any
legal formality. Thus the Italian Bishops alone outnumber
all the French, German, Hungarian and North
American together, though these last represent a
population nearly three times as large. The weakness
of the two French Cardinals, Bonnechose and Mathieu,
who ought to have taken the lead, has frustrated the
attempt to unite the French Bishops in a national
group. Bonnechose consulted Antonelli, who said
the French must not assemble in larger bodies than
fifteen or at most twenty together. The evil consequences
were at once shown in the elections.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Bishops are compelled by the Pope to hold
their sittings in a place where at least a third cannot
understand a word that is said, so that, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Cardinal
di Pietro long since declared he had not really understood
a single speech, and another Cardinal said that not
twenty words of all the speeches had reached his ear.
A really searching discussion and living interchange of
observations and replies is out of the question. No
speaker can hope to produce any impression on this
audience. And thus the first <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, which consists
of 140 pages, was the subject of general discussion for
weeks without any detailed discussion of the separate
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
articles being arrived at, or any point certainly ascertained,
notwithstanding the number of speakers. The only
result was a great waste of time, bodily fatigue and a
deep discouragement. Had the object been to satiate
the assembly with speeches <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>usque ad nauseam</foreign> it could
not have been better managed. It would be something
if the Fathers could read the speeches they can't
hear, but neither are they allowed to be read; the
Bishops may not even print their addresses at their
own cost. Thus many of them are wholly deprived of
the opportunity of expressing their views, knowing that
they will not be heard.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Vigorous preparations were made for two years
before the opening of the Council. There is matter
enough for ten Councils, but it is only communicated
to the Bishops piecemeal, so that they can get no insight
into the connection and plan of the separate propositions.
Thus a ready-made Council has been put
before 700 Bishops, which they are obliged again to
unstitch like a web. As the Bishops had no means of
gaining previous information, the Council is mostly
deaf and dumb, and has at last got driven into a
narrow pass from which there is no exit without a
thorough alteration of the order of business. No one
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
can say how it will be with the examination of the
separate articles of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>, and yet the Council
ought to have most carefully weighed every word of
decrees which are to be imposed on the world under
anathema.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Fifth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 24, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Since my last letter, the
Council, whose movements for a long time were like
those of a tortoise, has made gigantic strides. The
Goddess of Insolence (ὕβρις) rules here just as the
Greek tragedians&mdash;especially Sophocles&mdash;describe her.
All rumours of an adjournment of the Council were
partly well-meant wishes of several Bishops, partly
produced by the fact of the Governments&mdash;the French
in particular&mdash;earnestly desiring it. Here in Rome
no one of the Vatican party has thought of it for a
moment. All who know the real state of things and
persons here must be convinced that the Council will
certainly be gone through with to the end, either completely&mdash;in
full accordance with the well-calculated
plan sketched out during the last two years for partly
Jesuitizing and partly Romanizing everything in the
Church, in theology and in the religious life, and carrying
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
out centralization to the utmost extent&mdash;or that, at
least, there will be no adjournment till the most
precious jewel hitherto wanting to the Papal tiara,
dogmatic Infallibility, has been inserted there. Then,
and not till then, will the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> have obtained the
irresistible talisman which opens every gate, fulfils
every desire and brings every treasure. That dogma
is Aladdin's magic lamp for Rome.
</p>

<p>
There are three powers who wish to gain by the
Council, and who decide on its proceedings and destiny&mdash;the
Pope, the Jesuits, and the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. Among the
members of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> there are indeed very few who
have not long since made their calculations, with that
appreciation of the realities of life which is peculiar
to the Italian nation, and who do not know as well
what a dogma is worth for Rome as people know what
a man is <q>worth</q> in England. Every assailant of the
dogma is their personal enemy; he is simply emptying
their gold-mine. Nor is the doctrine less valuable and
indispensable to the Jesuits, at this day more than
before, since they no longer have to fear the rivalry
of any other Order in making capital out of the prerogative
of Infallibility.
</p>

<p>
As regards the Pope, he has constantly changed in
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
his official life and vacillated from one side to the
other, and those about him say that in many, nay in
most, things he follows capricious and momentary
impulses. But Pius is inflexible and immutable
where he fancies he is a divine instrument and has received
a divine mission, and that is the case here. He
is persuaded that he is ordained by the special favour
of God to be the most glorious of all Popes. Among
his predecessors there are three to whom he seems to
me to have a great likeness. I should say that he had
chosen them as models, if I could assume that he knew
their history. But Pius has never occupied himself
with the past; he is purely the child of his age, and
lives only in the present. The three are Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>,
Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>xi.</hi>, and above all Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> He has in common
with the first his strong experimental belief in his own
personal inspiration without any theological culture.
He resembles the second in giving himself up to the
theological guidance of the Jesuits, and in his highhanded
treatment of such Bishops as dare to have an
opinion of their own. And just as Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> used to
boast that hereafter men would be obliged to tell of
the lofty plans conceived by an aged Italian who, as
being near his death, might have rested and bewailed
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
his sins,<note place='foot'>Navagero, <hi rend='italic'>Relazione</hi>, p. 389 in the Venetian Collection, ed. Alberi, i. 7.</note> so does Pius too desire in his old age to
make great though peaceful conquests, and to establish
the Papal sovereignty as a <q>rocher du bronze,</q> to
borrow the phrase of another autocrat. With the help
of the Council he hopes to render the universal dominion
of the Papacy an impregnable fortress, by means of new
walls, bastions and batteries, and to hand it down to
his successors as an omnipresent and omnipotent power.
He believes that the thoughts and desires of his soul
are in reality the counsels of God made known to him
by inspiration, and that if by following these counsels
he accomplishes the deliverance of the Church and of
mankind, it is the Hand of God which uses him as an
instrument. And why should not Pius see a sign of
his election to high and extraordinary destinies in the
circumstance of his having already sat longer than any
of his 256 predecessors, even Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>, on the apostolic
throne? A history of his Pontificate has already been
written in this sense by one of the Jesuits of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà,</hi>
and Pius has the chapters read to him one after the
other. I am told that a chapter on the Council is
already written. The French Court historiographer,
Vertot, who had to describe a Belgian campaign including
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
the siege of a fortress, wrote the history of the siege
before it was finished, and said quietly, <q>Mon siège est
fait.</q> And thus the Jesuit historian of the Pope can
already say, <q>Mon Concile est fait.</q> And in one sense
the Council is indeed finished since the 23d inst.&mdash;finished
by the new order of business.
</p>

<p>
If the merit of this clever invention is primarily due
to the Cardinals on the Commission for revising motions,
and the Jesuits who were probably taken into partnership
with them, its introduction must be counted
among the most eventful acts of Pius, past or future.
If it is carried out and adhered to without opposition,
it is unquestionably the most conspicuous of all the
victories of the Pope. Margotti, the editor of the
<hi rend='italic'>Unita Cattolica</hi>, will hardly be able to find words to
do justice to the great day, February 23, 1870, with its
boundless wealth of happy results, in the next edition
of his work, <hi rend='italic'>Le Vittorie della Santa Chiesa sotto Pio
IX</hi>. A <hi rend='italic'>Te Deum</hi> will have to be sung in every Jesuit
College of the old and new world.
</p>

<p>
Great anxiety was felt beforehand about the new
order of business. It was said that the Sessions were
to be something more than mere votings, that there
would still be speeches made, that the written memorials
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
would not be so directly thrown into the waste-paper
basket, but would be considered and&mdash;if they approved
of them&mdash;made use of by the Commission. But everything
will be settled by the Commission and by a
simple majority of votes; the minority may talk, but
only so long as the Commission and the majority choose
to listen to them. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Væ victis!</foreign> The Council belongs to
the Italians and the Spaniards, who are in close alliance
with them: from henceforth to wish to reject any <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>
or decree brought before it, is like wanting to stop
water from flowing downwards. All the proposals of
the minority for a change in the order of business have
been left unnoticed. It had already been resolved that
a debate could only be cut short by the votes of a
majority of two-thirds, but this has been reversed.
What will the French and Germans do now? This is
naturally the question which trembles on every lip and
is written on every countenance. Will they simply
acquiesce in the <foreign rend='italic'>fait accompli</foreign> with a good grace, and
obediently assume the rôle of the Greek Chorus in the
drama of the Council&mdash;simply to reflect and moralize, but
take no active part in the proceedings? The next few
days will show. So much every one perceives; the order
of business is the noose which, once fixed on the minority,
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
cannot be got out of, and will only be drawn tighter
and tighter till it strangles them at last. It is clear
that the majority has the hide of a rhinoceros, from
which every arrow shot by the Opposition, however
skilfully aimed, glances off harmless. Where are
now the wise and foolish virgins? <q>Give us of your
oil, for our lamps are gone out,</q> must the Germans,
French, and Spanish say henceforth to the Italians,
and the answer will be more friendly than in the
Gospel: <q>You need not buy any more oil; come over
to our side and be content to use our store.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is hardly necessary to observe to your readers that
everything which takes place here turns on the question
of Infallibility. The new order of business is
merely the outer covering for this kernel. <q>With
Infallibility we have all we desire or need,</q> say the
Italians, if that is gained we may <q>let the nigger
go,</q> and can dispense with his services for the future.
But for German theologians, whose hair stands on
end at the new order of business and all it involves,
I can find no other consolation than what they may
derive from the following Persian tale. An English
ambassador sent to Persia&mdash;I think it was Morier&mdash;paid
the usual visits at Teheran, and was introduced
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
to the younger son of the Shah. He found
him groping about blindfold in the room, and feeling
for the furniture in it. The Prince explained this
strange business by telling him that it was the rule for
the younger sons to be blinded at the death of the
Shah, in order to make them incapable of succeeding,
and that he wished to prepare and practise himself
beforehand for the fate impending over him. <q>Go ye,
and do likewise.</q>
</p>

<p>
If the German theologians should still have courage
to present an address to their Bishops, the subscription
might be, <q>Morituri vos salutant.</q> Why have these
theologians come to such utter discomfiture?
</p>

<p>
Here one already hears shouts of triumph; the day
of retribution will soon come for those proud Transalpines,
when they must bend their necks under the
Caudine yoke of the new dogma, or await suspension,
degradation, etc.
</p>

<p>
If German theology had long been decried and hated
by the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and the Italian Jesuits, and if the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>
gladly took occasion to pour out its wrath on the
scholars of <q>foggy</q> Germany, you may conceive the
extent this fury has reached in Italian clerical papers
and curialist circles, since it has become known that
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
the most influential theologians have pronounced against
Infallibility, and that not one&mdash;with the exception of a
couple of pupils of the Jesuits&mdash;has said a word to defend
it. It is well that one of the most distinguished
Italians, a man whose devotion to the Church is unimpeached
even in Rome, and whom the Pope has
commissioned to write a history of the Council&mdash;I mean
Cantù&mdash;has some years ago confessed and censured
this characteristic of his countrymen. <q>To call laziness
superiority, and evade the trouble of examining questions
by depreciating them, this is only too much the
habit of Italians, and then they mock at the ponderous,
long-winded, hair-splitting Germans. But we must
endure the reproach of negligence and thoughtlessness
from the Germans, while we blindly accept falsified
documents.</q><note place='foot'><q>Ammantar la pigrizia di superiorità, sottrarsi alla noja d'esaminar
le quistioni col disprezarle, sono vezzi troppo communi in Italia, e il
beffarsi di questi pesanti Tedeschi, che vanno a cercare la fin dei fini. Ma
in tal caso rassegniamoci a vederci trattati, da questi di negligenza e di
spensierataggine quando accettiamo a occhi bendati carte, falsificate da
tristi speculatori o da sbadati raccoglitori,</q> etc.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Archivo Storico Italiano</hi>,
1860, xii. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
Cantù has hit on the sore place there; for it is
precisely their having pointed out the long line of
numerous and systematic forgeries, on which the
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
Roman claims of Infallibility are based, and which are
used to further other aims of the Italians, that is the
main ground of the hatred of the Germans. And now
Frenchmen too, like Gratry, come forward and publish
these facts over land and sea in their cosmopolitan
tongue and clear incisive style.
</p>

<p>
To return to what preceded the publication of the
new order of business; in the last sittings of the
Council coming events threw their shadows before.
The Bishops of Carcassonne and Belley declared roundly
that Infallibility must be proclaimed, and in order, said
the latter, to restore the menaced or broken unity of
the Church. The impatience and vexation of the
authorities are constantly on the increase. Manning
said there was only one way of stopping the definition,
and that was to cut the throats of half the 500 Bishops
of the majority. Of course the Prelates who heard
him cried out, like the Emperor Charles V. at the Diet
of Augsburg, when Count George of Brandenburg
wanted to cut off heads for another doctrine, <q>No heads
off! no heads off!</q> At the last sitting on the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de
Catechismo</hi>, on the 22d, a scene occurred which presages
what is to become the regular practice. The Bishop of
Namur had said, in reference to some previous attacks
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
on the Breviary, that no one who spoke against it could
be a good Christian. For the information of your readers
I must premise a few words here. The Breviary is a
collection of prayers and lections for the clergy, introduced
by Rome, consisting chiefly of psalms and
passages from the Bible and the Lives of the Saints.<note place='foot'>[It was originally intended for public use also, and is still recited
publicly by Cathedral Chapters and religions communities. Some portions
of it, as Vespers and Compline, are often used in parish churches also,
especially in France.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has used this, like so many other things, as
an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>instrumentum dominationis</foreign>, and a number of fables
and forgeries devised in the interest of the Papal system
have been interpolated into it. The French Church
had long since adopted the precaution of employing a
Breviary of her own, much better and purer than the
Roman. It was against observations made about this
in the Council that the harsh comment of the Bishop of
Namur was directed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Sixth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, Feb. 28, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Our last letter closed with an
account of a scene in the Session of February 22, occasioned
by some attacks on the Roman Breviary. The
Bishop of Namur had maintained that no one who
attacked it could be a good Christian.
</p>

<p>
Haynald was one of those who had censured the
present condition of the Breviary, and he now replied
to Bishop Gravez that in criticising it he had the
Fathers of Trent and the Popes themselves for accomplices
(<foreign rend='italic'>complices</foreign>). A tempest broke out at these
words. But Haynald went further and said, with
reference to Bishop Langalerie of Belley, that the
majority, with their proposals for new dogmas, were
the cause of the disunion which had broken out in the
Church, and that it would be much better for the heads
of the Church to confine themselves to preserving the
ancient doctrines in their purity, instead of adding new
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
ones. The Church had succeeded very well with the old
doctrines. At this first open attack in Council on the
Infallibilist project the storm grew fiercer, and Capalti
seized the bell of the President, De Angelis, rung it
violently and forbade the speaker to proceed. <q>Taceas
et ab ambone descendas,</q> he exclaimed. When Haynald
went on all the same, a wild cry broke from the majority.
The Archbishop of Calocsa at last came down,
and so great was the excitement that the sitting was
closed and the next postponed to March 2.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile more attention and care than before has
been devoted in Paris to what is going on at Rome.
The Emperor and his present ministers understand the
gravity of the situation; they know what would be
meant by such journals as the <hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>
daily appealing to infallible Papal decisions, and under
their authority calling in question every institution
and law of France, and proving beforehand to their
readers that there is no obligation in conscience to
submit to them, because the Pope has directly or indirectly
signified his disapproval. Archbishop Lavigerie
of Algiers brought back word to Cardinal Antonelli, on
returning to Rome from his mission, that France was in
no condition to tolerate the definition of Infallibility,
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
which might lead to a schism, since not only the whole
body of State-officers, but the writers, and even the
Faubourg St. Germain, were opposed to the new dogma.
Antonelli is not apt to be much influenced by such
representations, which he views as mere idle threats;
he is spoilt by the courtly flatteries of the ever obsequious
M. de Banneville, whom he has managed completely
to disarm. He has three devices of domestic diplomacy
by which he knows how to make excellent use of
both Banneville and Trautmansdorff. At one time he
says, <q>It is not we&mdash;Pius, the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and I&mdash;who
want the dogma, but the foreign Bishops, and we
should be encroaching on the freedom of the Council
by impeding them. And we ought not to subject ourselves
to that reproach.</q> Then, for a variety, he adopts
another line. <q>The Pope,</q> he says, <q>has all he wants
already, and the dogma of Infallibility would not give
him anything more. As it is, and with a Council
assembled, all the decrees emanate from him and receive
from him their validity, and he can summon or
dissolve the Council at his pleasure, so that it only
exists by his will and would crumble into dust without
him. It is therefore the interest of the Bishops, not ours,
that is in question here, and they will know well why
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
the dogma is so valuable to them.</q> His third formula
is, <q>Every good Christian believes the doctrine already,
and therefore little or nothing will be changed in the
Church by defining it, and we have not the least desire
to use the new decree for calling in question the existing
compacts and Concordats. We shall gladly leave
alone the concessions we have already granted.</q> These
resources of the Cardinal have hitherto sufficed. But
new powers and demands seem to be coming to the front,
which his diplomatic counters will no longer satisfy. I
have copies of two letters of Count Daru, of January 18
and February 5. These official expressions of opinion
from Paris have made the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> Jesuits bitterly
angry, and their famous article on the <hi rend='italic'>Policastri</hi>, in its
original form, contained a violent attack on the French
statesmen, who were classed with the other ministers
and diplomats in such ill repute at Rome. But this
roused the alarm of the supreme authority, and so the
Jesuits had to eat their own words, and to substitute
for their attack a high commendation of Count Daru
and the loyalty of France to the Concordat. There
is some good in having the articles of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>
regularly revised in the Vatican. I understand that it
is intended at Paris to send a special ambassador to
Rome to the Council.
</p>

<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>

<p>
Meanwhile the Bishops of the minority are consulting
how they shall deal with the new order of business.
It was announced to the Fathers at the Session of February
22 that, in accordance with these new regulations,
they must hand in all their observations on the first
ten chapters of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> in writing
within ten days.
</p>

<p>
Archbishop Spalding of Baltimore has not receded
from his ludicrous notion that his Infallibilist formula
is milder and more tolerable than that of the 400. He
has laid it before the thirty-five French Bishops (of the
minority), who have unanimously rejected it. Its essence
consists, as was mentioned before, in asserting that everybody
must receive with unconditional inward assent
every Papal decision on every question of faith or morals
or Church life. On all theological principles such faith
can only be accorded in cases where all possibility of
error is excluded, or, in other words, where a revealed
truth is concerned; and therefore to accept this formula
would be to set aside the limitation of Papal
Infallibility, hitherto recognised even in Rome, to decisions
pronounced <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign>. And thus, in the crush
and confusion of the innumerable and often contradictory
decisions of Popes, theology would degenerate
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
into a lamentable caricature of a system&mdash;<q>science</q> it
could no longer be termed&mdash;involved in hopeless contradictions.
If the good Spalding had the slightest
acquaintance with Church history, he would know that
he was bound, in virtue of his inward assent paid to
all Papal decrees, first of all to reject his own orders as
invalid.<note place='foot'>[Cf. <q>Janus,</q> pp. 60-62, 275-8.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
And now I must notice more particularly what
Bishop Ketteler has published against me in some
German newspapers. He says that in the telegram of
February 13, published in the <hi rend='italic'>Allg. Zeitung</hi> of February
15, he has found the opportunity he had long desired for
convicting the writer of the <hi rend='italic'>Letters from Rome</hi> of building
up <q>a whole system of lying and deceit.</q><note place='foot'>The proposal of two Rhenish Prelates for a common declaration against
Döllinger's paper on Infallibility was rejected in the meeting of German
Bishops. The chief opponents were Hefele, Eberhard, Raynald, Strossmayer
and Förster, who maintained that, certain arguments apart, Döllinger
represented in the main the views of most German Bishops on the subject.
It was further insisted, in express repudiation of the stand-point of mere
<q>inopportuneness,</q> that the addresses already signed by the Infallibilists
were directed in principle against the doctrine of the Church. The two Prelates
declared nevertheless that they would not separate themselves from
their colleagues who had signed those documents.</note> It is
<q>an indescribable dishonesty,</q> a <q>detestable untruth,</q>
etc. His short letter bristles with such accusations.
The untruths he complains of are the following:&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>

<p>
(1.) The telegram called the statement made by
Bishop Ketteler and his ally, Bishop Melchers, a <q>proposal.</q>
He replies that it was only a <q>communication.</q>
</p>

<p>
(2.) It treats the occurrence as a <q>negotiation,</q>
whereas it was only a <q>short conference.</q>
</p>

<p>
(3.) There was no debate with <q>a serious opposition.</q>
The Bishops indeed had expressed different views, and
some had disapproved Döllinger's pronouncement, while
the others thought only certain individual Bishops
might have occasion to come forward against it. (They
accordingly understood Ketteler's <q>communication</q>
just as my informant did, and therefore spoke out
against accepting it.)
</p>

<p>
(4.) Ketteler did not hear any Bishop say, as stated
in the telegram, that Döllinger really had the majority
of (German) Bishops with him.
</p>

<p>
And now let us compare Ketteler's account, deducting
the abusive comments subjoined to every sentence,
with the&mdash;of course extremely compressed&mdash;account in
the telegram, and we shall find the two in substantial
agreement. The Bishop is obliged to interpolate something
into the telegram, in order to find fuel for the fire of
holy indignation his delirious fancy has betrayed him
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
into. He quarrels with me fiercely for saying there was
a debate and a negotiation, whereas there was only a
conference; but I never made use of those words. He
says he made no motion, but he himself recounts statements
of the Bishops which show clearly that they
understood his <q>communication</q> as an invitation to
do as he did. Only one somewhat important point of
difference remains, viz., whether the Bishops named in
the telegram said what they are there reported to have
said or not. Bishop Ketteler can only say that he did
not hear them say it. But considering that in an informal
meeting of forty or forty-five persons, broken up
into groups, a great deal is said which every one in the
room does not hear, and that I received my information
the same day from one who was present, I still adhere
to my assertion that they did say it. For the rest,
I am much indebted to Bishop Ketteler; he assures us
that he has long desired an opportunity for saying all
the evil he can of me and my Letters. He has now
made a grand onset. If he had found anything in the
eighteen long Letters before him better suited to his purpose,
he would certainly not have taken refuge in such
petty trivialities and, like a boy with snowballs, have
flung what has turned into water in his hand. He has
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
thus unwillingly given testimony to the truthfulness of
my Letters. And for this I pardon him his exaggerated
rhetoric, but will not suppress the remark made by an
Englishman who knows mankind well: <q>There are
certain women, says Fielding, always ready to raise a
cry of <q>Murder, fire, rape</q> and the like, but that means
no more in their mouths than any one else means in
going over the scale, Ut, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol,</q> etc.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Seventh Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, March 8, 1870.</hi>&mdash;<q>Habemus Papam falli nescium!</q>
The Bishops of the Manning and Deschamps
party are in raptures; all Rome, say the Infallibilist
devotees, is in the highest spirits. The great doctrine,
on which, as all the Jesuits and their disciples assure us,
hinges the salvation of humanity and the regeneration
of science and literature, was published on March 6 in
the form of a supplement to the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>.
The Pope bears witness of himself that he is infallible
as teacher of the Church, and the great majority of the
Council will readily assent. Already they are exulting
in that moment of triumph when the Pope from his
throne in the Hall, <q>sacro Concilio approbante,</q> and
amid the pealing of all the bells in Rome, will proclaim
to the world that it is now fortunate enough to possess an
infallible teacher and judge in all questions of faith and
morals, guaranteed by God Himself. Day and hour for
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
the proclamation will be chosen with the greatest deliberation
and foresight, and here another ground for
clinging so pertinaciously to the present Council Hall
comes out. It was thought quite incomprehensible
why <q>the master</q> insulted 750 aged men by compelling
them, in spite of all wishes and representations and the
evidence of his own senses, to hold their sittings in a
Chamber so utterly unfit for the purpose. In a city so
abounding in churches and halls as Rome this seemed
an act rather of ill-tempered caprice than of hospitable
care. It was known of course that the previous expectations
of the Vatican had been disappointed, that it
had been hoped the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> would be received by acclamation
or by storm, as it were, without discussion,
and that the Hall had been chosen on the very ground
of its acoustic defects being adapted to that end. Now
however a new recommendation of the Hall betrays
itself. At a certain hour on a clear and cloudless day
the rays of the sun fall exactly on the place where the
Pope's throne stands, so that Pius may hope, by help of
careful arrangements about the time, to stand in a glory of
sunlight at the moment when he announces to the world
the divine revelation of his own infallibility. It is on this
wise, as we said before, that he has had himself represented
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
in the memorial picture of the proclamation of
the Immaculate Conception. At the Coronation of
Charles <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> of France doves were let fly into the church.
And so in Rome also a dove might be trained, so as
to make it hover above the Pope at the moment of his
apotheosis being proclaimed by his own mouth, which
would make the effect quite irresistible.
</p>

<p>
In this state of things the eyes of all men are turned
on the Bishops united, or rather not united but only
assembled, in Council. The great majority are much
in the disposition of the Athenians, when Alexander
sent word to them that he had become a god, and
wished to be worshipped as such. The popular assembly
cried out that, if Alexander really wished to be
a god, he was one. So say 300 Bishops: <q>We eat the
Pope's bread and drink his wine and rest under his
roof, so&mdash;let him be infallible.</q> And 100 Bishops say:
<q>We are nothing but titular Bishops, with no dioceses
or flocks; from whom but the Pope do we get our
titles? So&mdash;let him be infallible.</q> Others again say:
<q>We call ourselves Bishops or Vicars-Apostolic by
favour of the Pope, and during his good pleasure. Let
him then be infallible.</q> Lastly others say: <q>The
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has us in its power, and we need it at every step;
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
the Pope must be infallible, since he desires it.</q> Thus
we have 550 born infallibilists. And to them must be
added those whom the Italians&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Mamiani&mdash;call
more curtly than courteously <q>gli Energumeni
stranieri,</q> prelates of the Manning type <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et id genus
omne</foreign>, who really take part as volunteers in this campaign
for the triumph of papal infallibility and the
domination of souls. Many, like Sieyès formerly, will
vote <q>la mort et sans phrase,</q> but we shall read of
unctuous motives alleged by the volunteers for their
votes. They want infallibility for themselves as well
as others; for themselves, because then there will be
no further need <q>to dig,</q> for which they have <q>neither
hand nor foot,</q> but all doctrines will be received ready
made, measured and cut out by the Jesuits and stamped
and guaranteed as genuine in the Roman printing-office;
for others, because thereby every doubt or suspicion
or inconvenient demand in matters of doctrine
will be summarily got rid of and suppressed.
</p>

<p>
It is three months to-day since the Council was
opened. Viewed from without, the circumstances could
hardly have been more favourable; in national diversities
and universality of representation the assembly surpassed
all former Councils, nor was it so obvious at the
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
beginning that under this bright outside was concealed
a crying and iniquitous inequality of representation, and
that here again the mastery was placed in the hands of
the Italians. But how have all hopes been deceived
now, and who had thought of this lamentable upshot!
</p>

<p>
Lamartine desired of his age that Italy should produce
<q>des hommes et non de la poussière humaine.</q>
For three months have these 750 prelates been assembled&mdash;in
theory the very flower of the Catholic
world, the pastors of 180 million souls, men with a rich
experience at their back. They were at once separated
into two parties, one of 600 and the other of about 150.
On which side are the men and on which the human
dust? What have these 600 done in the three months
they have been together, what have they brought to an
issue, and what thoughts or sparks of intelligence have
been struck out of this daily contact with so many high
dignitaries from the four quarters of the world? Their
utter sterility, aimlessness and poverty of thought&mdash;their
passively resigning themselves to a mere assent to the
thoughts and words of others&mdash;all this, when watched
close at hand, makes a painful impression. It is true
that European history since 1789 has accustomed us
to the infirmities and follies and the unproductiveness
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
of great deliberative assemblies; it has become an
every-day phenomenon, and in our days one's expectations
from an ecclesiastical assembly can only be of the most
moderate kind. There is no fear there of rash and hasty
decisions or revolutionary measures. But La Bruyere's
saying, <q>A great assembly always becomes a rabble,</q> is
verified even at Rome, and the Italians of 1870 have
already begun to emulate the example of their ancestors
in 1562. Just as the majority at Trent knew how
to reduce a disagreeable speaker to silence by wild cries
and coughing and scraping with their feet, so is it now
at the Vatican Council. It is the humiliating feeling
of intellectual impotence and of deficiency alike in
knowledge, eloquence and mind, as compared with the
minority, from whom almost everything emanates that
can be called life or thought in the Council. They feel
their abject littleness, in their thankless rôle of being a
mere echo of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> and Canons proposed, and
having to present in so unadorned and undisguised a
form that <q>sacrificio dell' intelletto</q> which the Jesuits
so eagerly commend. The honour of being afterwards
lauded, as one of the 600 organs of the Holy Ghost at
this Council, has to be purchased rather dear. But we
cannot in fact come to close quarters and converse with
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
these Bishops of the majority, without being reminded
of the reply of a Dane to a Frenchman, who said to
him (before the Revolution) that the highest Order in
France was that of the Holy Ghost. <q>Notre Saint
Esprit est un éléphant,</q> answered the Dane. But the
situation is almost too serious for such thoughts.
</p>

<p>
A synopsis of the outstanding measures has been
presented to the Council. There are altogether 51
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>: 3 on <q>Faith,</q> 28 on <q>Discipline,</q> 18 on
<q>Religious Orders,</q> 2 on <q>Oriental Church affairs:</q> of
these 39 have not yet been distributed, and 46 not
discussed; 12 are in the hands of the Bishops, of
which 5 have been already discussed and are to be again
presented and examined, after being modified by the
Commission. This is obviously matter enough for two
years' work; yet the Council Hall and the hitherto
irresistible and invulnerable majority will conspire to
push the 51 <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> expeditiously through the Council,
unabbreviated and hardly altered. If only the
master at last praises and rewards his servants!
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile 34 French Bishops have signed a Statement
of Protest against the new order of business. I
hear that the perversity of deciding doctrines by counting
heads is emphatically dwelt on. The same document
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
has been subscribed by 33 German Bishops, with
certain additions. Cardinals Mathieu and Rauscher,
while professing their agreement, did not think it well
to sign. Some 10 or 12 Germans have accepted a
shorter but more precise and pointed address, maintaining
the same principles. Some Orientals too have
signed, while the deliberations of the Americans, on
the other hand, came to no result.
</p>

<p>
Such declarations are necessary for the outer world
and for the satisfaction of their own consciences, but they
can hardly be expected to produce any effect, nor do the
signataries themselves anticipate any important change
being made in the new <foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign>. Would that their
representations were formal protests, declaring that they
would take no further part in an assembly lacking the
necessary conditions of a true Council! But neither
the French nor Germans could resolve on that. It
would be hard even for a man like Dupanloup, who
may be reckoned a leader of the Opposition, openly to
contradict his own earlier writings about the Pope.
The question suggests itself, If Pius, before his infallibility
is made a dogma, has said, <q>I am the way, the
truth, and the life,</q> what will he say when his apotheosis
is accomplished? What words of human language
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
will suffice adequately to denote the sublimity of his
position? A former saying of a member of the Italian
aristocracy, well known for his witty remarks, occurs
to me, <q>Gli altri Papi credevano esser Vicarii di Christo,
ma questo Papa crede che nostro Signore sia il suo
Vicario in cielo.</q>
</p>

<p>
We live here in the place whereof Tacitus wrote
eighteen centuries ago, <q>Cupido dominandi cunctis
affectibus flagrantior est.</q><note place='foot'>Tac. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>xv.</hi> 53.</note>
</p>

<p>
If infallibility is defined, every member of the Roman
Congregations has the pleasing certainty that he possesses
<q>divinæ particulam auræ.</q> Pius is as firm and
resolved as ever; the Jesuits have told him that, if
the new dogma produces any confusion and scandal in
the Church, it matters nothing&mdash;other dogmatic decisions
have led to great confusion, but have remained
triumphant; in a hundred years all will be quiet.
Father Piccirillo, the editor of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> and special
favourite of Pius, has consoled other prelates in the
same way.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> has been compared with the
lecture notes of a Jesuit Professor at the Collegio
Romano, and the two are shown to agree precisely.
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
Even the most abject <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>-men of the majority feel
rather ashamed of this; they had not quite expected to
be summoned to Rome, simply in order to formulate the
lecture notes of a Jesuit into dogmatic decrees for the
whole Church.
</p>

<p>
An individual so insignificant intellectually, that I
never expected to have any occasion for mentioning his
name, and who is regarded in German circles as the
standing joke of the Council, a certain Wolanski, has
just been placed on the Congregation of the Index, as
censor for German books. He would be utterly incompetent
even to transcribe the work of a German
theologian for the press. But in Rome they like, from
time to time, to give a kick of this sort to foreigners.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Postscript.</hi>&mdash;I have just been put in a position to tell
you something of the contents of the episcopal protest
against the new order of business. In respect to the
thirteenth article it is objected, that in former Councils
a method of voting simply designed to secure expedition
(<q>eo expedito modo</q>) has never been adopted&mdash;a
form <q>quo nullus certe alius gravitati et maturitati
deliberationis, imo et ipsi libertati minus favet.</q> It
is added, that even in political assemblies the right is
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
granted of demanding that votes should be taken by
calling names. It is not rapidity of decision, but prudence
and the utmost possible security, that is the
important point. <q>Quod in Concilio maxime refert,
non est ut cito res expediatur, sed ut caute et tutissime
peragatur. Longe satius est paucas quæstiones expendere
et prudenter solvere, quam multo numerosiores
proponere et decurtatis discussionibus suffragiisque
præcipitanter collectis res tam graves irrevocabiliter
definire.</q> The document goes on to protest against
the regulation for first counting the votes of those who
assent to the proposed decrees, and not till after this
has been done of those who reject them. This is quite
wrong; <q>Cum in quæstionibus fidei tutius sit sistere et
definitionem differre, quam temere progredi, ideo conditio
dissentientium favorabilior esse debet, et ipsis
prioritas in dandis suffragiis excedenda esset.</q> The
memorialists further desire that, in the definition of a
dogma or the establishment of a canon armed with
anathema, the votes should be orally given by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>
and <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, not by rising and sitting down. And
then great stress is laid on the point of dogmas not being
decided by a mere majority but only by moral unanimity,
so that any decree opposed by a considerable number of
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
Bishops may be held to be rejected. The Bishops say,
<q>Cum dogmata constent Ecclesiarum consensu, ut ait
Bellarminus,</q> moral unanimity is necessary. There is
a further demand or request of the Bishops, <q>ut suffragia
patrum non super <emph>toto Schemate</emph> et quasi <emph>in globo</emph>,
sed seorsim super unâquâque definitione, super unoquoque
Canone, per <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> aut <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign> sigillatim rogentur
et edantur.</q> The Fathers should also be free,
according to the Pope's previous arrangement, to give
in their remarks in writing. But the following is the
most important passage:&mdash;<q>Id autem quod spectat ad
numerum suffragiorum requisitum ut quæstiones dogmaticæ
solvantur, in quo quidem rei summa est et
totius Concilii cardo vertitur, ita grave est, ut nonnisi
admitteretur, quod reverenter et enixe postulamus,
conscientia nostra intolerabili pondere premeretur.
Timeremus, ne Concilii Œcumenici character in dubium
vocari posset, ne ansa hostibus præberetur, S. Sedem
et Concilium impetendi, sicque demum apud populum
Christianum hujus Concilii auctoritas labefactaretur,
<q>quasi veritate et libertate caruerit,</q> quod his turbatissimis
temporibus tanta esset calamitas ut pejor excogitari
non possit.</q> On this we might however observe
with all respect, that a greater calamity is quite conceivable,
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
and that is the sanctioning of a doctrine
exegetically, dogmatically and historically untenable
by an assembly calling itself a Council. The Protest
ends with these words:&mdash;<q>Spe freti futurum ut hæ
nostræ gravissimæ animadversiones ab Eminentiis vestris
benevolenti animo accipiantur, earumque, quae par
est, ratio habeatur, nosmet profitemur: Eminentiarum
Vestrarum addictissimos et obsequentissimos famulos.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Eighth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, March 9.</hi>&mdash;The decree on infallibility appeared
on Sunday, March 6, just a year after the project was
announced in the <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Zeitung</hi>. The Bishops
knew three weeks before, through an indiscretion of
Perrone's, that it was drawn up. But its extreme and
unqualified form will have taken many by surprise.
Men could hardly believe that the Roman See would
publicly confess so huge an excess of ambition, and
itself court a reproach of which the Catholic Church
may indeed be cleared, but the Papacy never. The
circumstances preceding the appearance of this composition,
which will be a phenomenon in the world's
history, are hardly less remarkable and significant than
the text itself.
</p>

<p>
It was decided on February 21, at a meeting of the
French Cabinet presided over by the Emperor, to
send a special ambassador to the Council. A despatch
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
to this effect was forwarded to Rome the same evening.
The notion so greatly displeased the Marquis de Banneville,
that he delayed carrying out his instructions and
sent word of his anxieties to Paris. Here he said
quite openly that he could remain no longer, and must
go to Paris to get the decision reversed. He contented
himself however with sending an <foreign rend='italic'>attaché</foreign> to France.
At last, on March 1, the design of the French Government
was communicated to Cardinal Antonelli, and
three days afterwards, on March 4, the Marquis de
Banneville came to receive his reply. The Cardinal
was unfortunately prevented by an attack of gout
from seeing him. And thus the answer has been
given in the unexpected form of a dogmatic decree.
</p>

<p>
Not less remarkable is the coincidence of the decree
with the publication of Count Daru's Letter. Its
publication, which proclaims to the world the policy
of the French Cabinet towards the Court of Rome, has
excited the greater sensation in Rome, as it could not
have emanated from any ordinary correspondent. The
letter was only known to the English Government, and
there was no copy in England except in the hands of
the Ministry. It cannot be supposed that it would
be offered for publication without the connivance of
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
Count Daru himself, and this conjecture is confirmed
by the tone of the <hi rend='italic'>Français</hi>, Count Daru's organ, on
the subject. It was open to it to disavow the letters,
which are addressed to a private individual, and not,
as the <hi rend='italic'>Times</hi> incorrectly stated, to a French prelate.
But instead of seizing on this loophole, the <hi rend='italic'>Français</hi>
says that the private letters of the minister contain
nothing different from his public despatches. What
gives these things the greater weight is that they imply
the probability of interpellations, in Paris as well as
in Florence, and the ministry must be presumed to be
determined to persist to the end in the path it has
entered upon.
</p>

<p>
But the clearest light is thrown on the act of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, when we look at its relation to the simultaneous
movement among the minority.
</p>

<p>
The new order of business seemed to many calculated
to bring the internal split in the Opposition to the surface.
To accept it was equivalent to accepting the
dogma itself. To reject it was to intimate the resolution
not to surrender the rights of Bishops, of whom
St. Thomas says, <q>Obtinent in Ecclesiâ summum potestatem,</q>
and therefore not to recognise the Pope's infallibility.
But it has just been explained in the most
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
emphatic terms in Father Gratry's Letters, which are in
the hands of all the Bishops, how difficult it is to coquet
with the Jesuit dogmas without falling into the old
Jesuit system of morality. However, this much desired
division only occurred on a very limited scale.
</p>

<p>
The Opposition resolved to protest against the order
of business. The Protest is said to have been drawn up
by skilful French hands, and was subscribed on March
4 by thirty-four French Bishops, and another, signed by
almost the same number of German Bishops, was presented
to the Legates two days later. A very high
estimate is formed of its importance here. According
to the Roman view the majority of the Council has no
better right than the minority to proclaim a new dogma,
for the right belongs to the Pope alone, who can just as
well elevate the teaching of the minority as of the majority
into a dogma. And therefore, in maintaining that
no dogma can be defined without the universal consent&mdash;the
moral unanimity&mdash;of the Episcopate, and that a
Council which receives a dogma without that consent is
liable to be rejected as not free and Œcumenical, the
Bishops are not only protesting against the threatened
encroachments of the majority, but just as much against
the claim of the Pope to define dogmas by his own
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
authority. I have lately cited the words of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> on
that point. In putting forward and defending their
right and qualification to be witnesses of the faith and
representatives of their Churches, the Bishops are not
only vindicating a position very difficult to assail, but
at the same time shaking the principal foundation of the
present Council. In the first place the minority represent
relatively far greater numbers of Catholics than
their adversaries, and in the next place the bulk of the
majority is artificially swelled by a crowd of prelates
who really represent no Churches and only bear witness
for themselves. That many of them have been
simply created to give their services at this Council, is
notorious. According to the official Roman register,
fifty-one Bishops <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign> were named between June
1866 and August 1869. By every one of these creations
the Pope has neutralized by his own plenary
power the vote of an Archbishop of Paris or Vienna;
in other words, he has put some favourite Roman monsignore
on an equality, as regards the decisions of
the Council, with a venerable Church containing
more than a million of souls. The presence of such
elements in the assembly gives grounds for doubting
whether it can be regarded as a real representation
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
of the whole Church, and so this declaration of the
Bishops is like knocking a nail in the coffin of the
Œcumenical Council.
</p>

<p>
I have mentioned that the Protest of the French
Bishops was handed in on March 4. That day was the
beginning of the decisive crisis for the Opposition. The
adhesion of the Germans was next awaited; it followed
on the 6th March, and their example is pretty
sure to be followed by other nations. The prospect of
this danger, combined with the news from France,
brought the long preconcerted resolve of the other side
to sudden and immediate maturity. A few days
before they had not intended to come forward with the
decree yet. But now the great object was to cut short
any further development on the part of the Opposition,
and, if possible, to hinder the German Protest. The
existing situation seems even to have influenced
the form of the decree. For a moment the French
middle party&mdash;Bonnechose, Lavigerie, etc.&mdash;had fancied
a professedly moderate formula would be carried, but
now the counsels of the most determined infallibilists
prevailed, and the Pope, in great visible excitement,
gave his assent to the decree in the form in which it
has been published. This took place on March 5. The
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
decree is dated March 6. With the view of stopping
the German Protest, they did not wait for the next sitting
to distribute the printed copies to the Fathers in
Council as usual, but sent them direct to their houses.
This was the answer to the protesting movement.
</p>

<p>
Considering that none of the former addresses of the
minority&mdash;some twelve have been presented&mdash;have
been taken the slightest notice of, there were of course
the best reasons for anticipating no better fate for this
last. But it has served another purpose. It was an
intimation on the part of the signataries that their
patience has reached its limits. The Protest did not
indeed pledge them to any definite course of action.
But it certainly imposes on them the duty of not tolerating
anything further of the same kind, and not lending
a hand to any decision affecting the whole future of
the Church, under conditions they have themselves
declared to imperil the authority and solidity of the
Council. Either the Protest means nothing, and the
signataries are as persuaded of its worthlessness and
insincerity as their adversaries, or it means that they
will not allow the great dogma to come on for discussion
unless they obtain an assurance that no dogma
shall be proclaimed by Pope or Council without a moral
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
unanimity. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> have known how to give so
emphatic an expression to their contempt for the Opposition,
that even the sharpest and bitterest words would
show less scorn and insolence than their act. By
choosing the precise moment, when the minority declare
that their conscience is troubled and in doubt about the
legitimacy and result of the Council altogether, for
bringing forward the very decree which has all along
been the main cause of that doubt and trouble of conscience,
they proclaim plainly and emphatically that
they know the Opposition regards its own words as
nothing but words, and that there is no earnest manly
decision or religious conviction behind them. The conscientiousness
of the Opposition, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> of the most distinguished
French and German Bishops, could not be put
to a prompter, a more crucial, or a more decisive
test.
</p>

<p>
How will this test be borne? How will the doctrine
of the Church and the honour of two nations be saved?
The events of the next few days will decide.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Twenty-Ninth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, March 15.</hi>&mdash;Livy relates that, in the battle at
the Thrasimene Lake, the combatants on either side,
Romans and Carthaginians, felt nothing of the earthquake
under their feet. Here in Rome it is not so
much the heat of the contest that makes the great body
of Bishops unconscious of the moral earthquake which
has begun to shake the Church, for there is no strife in
the ranks of the majority, and their intercourse with the
other party is very small. But every one thinks first of
his own home and diocese, and the Italians, Spaniards
and South Americans&mdash;nearly 500 prelates in all&mdash;have
abundant cause for reckoning on absolute indifference and
ease, on a passive and generally willing assent. In those
countries it is only money questions, the contest about
Church property, that stirs men's minds. How much
is to be left to the clergy or taken from them, that is
the question here. And the Bishops hope that papal
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
infallibility will give some added force to the papal
decisions on the inviolability of Church property.
</p>

<p>
Among the Opposition Bishops many are still in good
spirits and full of confidence. <q>We are too many, and
we represent too considerable portions of the Christian
world, for our resistance to be ignored and our votes
thrust aside,</q> is what many of them still assert. But
the dominant party don't admit this. Antonelli says:
<q>As soon as the Pope promulgates a decree with the
assent of a great number of Bishops, he is infallible,
and therefore a minority of opposing votes need not be
attended to.</q> Naturally&mdash;for he, like other Italians,
moves in the circle of papal infallibility which he, as
advocate and financier, considers to belong to the
<q>grandes idées de l'Église.</q> He would certainly, if
asked, agree with the view of Cardinal Jacobazzi, about
1530, that the Pope could hold an Œcumenical Council
with one Bishop only and issue an infallible decree.
The state of the case is this: if the decree is published
by the Pope with the assent of the majority of the
Council, it is ruled that the gift of infallibility has all
along resided in the Popes alone, and that the supreme
authority in dogmas has only been derived to General
Councils from them, whether by their taking part in
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
the proceedings or confirming them. On this theory,
even a very considerable number of opposing Bishops
have no rights; the Pope could issue a dogmatic decree
with the minority against the votes of the majority, for
he and he alone would always be the organ of the Holy
Ghost. Either no reply will be given to the complaints
of the Bishops about the new order of business, any
more than to their previous memorials, or they will be
told that it is reserved to the Pope to settle whether a
decree or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> voted by a majority only shall be
promulgated, since he, being alone infallible, can do
what he pleases. In this sense the silence of Section
14 may well be interpreted.
</p>

<p>
All the talk about <q>inopportuneness</q> is now quite
at an end. I had predicted that from the first. Any
Bishop who wanted to discuss now, whether it was the
right time for making the new dogma, would be
laughed at rather than listened to. It has been decided
by 500 Bishops with the Pope that the decree is opportune,
and in saying that the question is about the
truth of articles of faith, not their convenience, they
have reason and history on their side.
</p>

<p>
There are said to be 100 Opinions or Objections of the
Bishops about or against the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on the Church,
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
already in the hands of the Commission of Faith.
Among them is the memorial of an eminent German
Bishop, whose bosom two souls seem to inhabit, and
who therefore occupies the singular position at once of
a friend of papal infallibility and an opponent of the
definition and member of the Opposition. He read his
paper in the meeting of German Bishops, and it was
received with general approval, in spite of the pungent
comments it contained on the new order of business in
connection with the publication of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on infallibility
a few days later, as being a disgrace to the
Council and the Church.
</p>

<p>
Count Trautmansdorff and M. Beust have received
from Antonelli one of those quieting and entirely
conciliatory answers that clerical statesman is so fond
of pouring forth in all directions.<note place='foot'>I take this opportunity of observing that the <hi rend='italic'>Mémorial Diplomatique</hi>,
which has the credit of supplying the world regularly with methodical
fictions from Rome, has also given a spurious reply of Antonelli's to
Beust's note. Perhaps one of your Paris correspondents can explain the
rare persistency of that journal in habitually making game of the French
with lies and inventions which are immediately exposed. Here in Rome
many are disposed to seek the authors of them in the office of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>
or in the <hi rend='italic'>Gesu</hi>.</note> Its substance is as
follows: in theory, and as regards what the scholastics
called universals, where high and far-reaching principles
have to be established, the Church is inexorable;
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
there she cannot abandon an iota of her claims, and
must draw and force home the sword of anathema.
She must therefore necessarily pronounce modern
civilisation, with its freedoms, a medley of soul-destroying
errors, must raise the banner of coercion and
forcible suppression, and accordingly condemn freedom
of religious profession and of the press. But in practice&mdash;in
Concordats and special Indults and concessions of
graces&mdash;the Pope is not so strict and inexorable; there
he is open to negotiations, and the separate Governments
can obtain from him as a favour the actual
toleration of what in theory he most solemnly condemns,
of course only <foreign rend='italic'>durante beneplacito</foreign>, so long as it
pleases him and the Governments behave well and
don't deserve to be punished by the withdrawal of
their indults and privileges. And that is so long as
circumstances remain unaltered, for it is self-evident
that, as soon as the temper of public opinion and the
political situation become such as to offer any prospect
of an ecclesiastical pretension being successfully urged,
the indult will be abrogated and the practice conformed
to the theory. Antonelli always has both pockets full
of such distinctions between the strict and hard theory
and the mild and indulgent pliability in practice, and
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
no diplomatist leaves him without such consolation.
De Banneville has always been satisfied with the fare
thus set before him by the Secretary of State. Trautmansdorff
has so far the advantage, that the doctrines
of Church and State imposed by the Court of Rome on
the Council give the Austrian Government a very convenient
handle for declaring the legal abolition of the
Concordat, which is practically torn to pieces already;
for with a Pope who has become infallible and feels
himself called to be the supreme judge of right and
wrong, though there may indeed be an armistice, no real
and genuine peace and no treaty is possible.
</p>

<p>
Moreover nothing can be more convenient and elastic
than the theory Antonelli expounds with all the unction
of priestly diplomacy to the representatives of the
European Governments. It makes everything&mdash;persons
and institutions, governments and peoples&mdash;ultimately
dependent on the indulgence and favour of the
Pope. By the higher and divine law, so runs this
doctrine, everything in the world should properly be
differently arranged; the censorship of the Holy Office,
religious coercion and clerical immunities, in a word
the whole system of canon law, should flourish everywhere
in full vigour as in the States of the Church.
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
But the Vicar of God is merciful; he condescends to
the evil condition of States and of mankind, and does
what is so easily done in Rome, he dispenses&mdash;for at
Rome obsolete laws are maintained simply to supply
matter for dispensations,&mdash;he declares his readiness to
tolerate what in itself is to be condemned, out of regard
for the unfavourable circumstances of the age, and thus
all at last falls under the sceptre of the Pope, who rules
at one time by favour and dispensations, at another by
strict law. Constitutions and laws will be allowed to
exist for awhile, and until further notice. This however
is no recognition of them, but only an <q>indult,</q>
for which sovereigns and statesmen and nations must
be thankful while it lasts, but which may at any
moment be revoked.
</p>

<p>
The plan of acclamation, announced by the Jesuits as
far back as February 1869, still counts many friends.
There are 600 episcopal throats ready to shout, and
these prelates had the rather get the affair settled in
that summary fashion, because they would then be
spared the hearing of things which bring a blush to
many a face. For the Opposition Bishops could bring
forward reasons and facts which, if once spoken in this
place, would make a powerful echo and come unrefuted
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
before the present and future generations. Of all
possible questions that of infallibility is certainly the
one which can least be discussed here and before 275
Italian prelates. What has happened in the last sittings,
the exaltation of some and the bitterness of others,
gives no hope of a quiet examination, but on the contrary
leads us to expect that the majority will make the
fullest use either of their physical preponderance or of
the new rights given them by the Pope for reducing
their adversaries to silence. Many who are resolved to
gratify the Pope's desire by their <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>, are apprehensive
that the objections of their opponents might leave the
unpleasant taste of an unanswered argument in their
mouths, and that the sting of a vote given without
adequate knowledge and examination might remain
fixed in the conscience of the Bishops. In this connection
the answer of a North American Bishop of the
infallibilist party is significant. He said that he remembered
having heard, when in the theological class
in his seminary, that the condemnation of Pope Honorius
by the Sixth Council meant nothing, and now in his
old age nobody could require him to study and examine
the question for himself.
</p>

<p>
Since the appearance of Gratry's Letters, what is most
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
especially dreaded is the mention and discussion of the
forgeries and fictions that have been perpetrated for
centuries past in the interest of the Papacy. Should
they really come to be spoken of in the Council Hall,
one may be quite prepared for Legate Capalti, even if
he is not presiding, striking his bell till it bursts. The
Italian and Spanish majority would sooner let a speaker
teach Arianism and Pelagianism than touch on this
sore. Cyprian, pseudo-Isidore, Anselm, Deusdedit,
Gratian, Thomas Aquinas and Cyril&mdash;these are now
terrible names, and hundreds here would fain stop their
ears when they are uttered. <q>Is there then no balm in
Gilead, no physician?</q> Just now a theologian or historian
would be worth his weight in gold, who could
produce evidence that all these forgeries and inventions
are genuine monuments of Christian antiquity, and that
the whole edifice of papal absolutism has been built up
with the purest and most conscientious loyalty to truth.
For this <q>horse</q> they would now, like Richard <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> of England,
offer a kingdom. For the first time the world, with
a free press in full possession, is to accept a new dogma
with all its extensive belongings&mdash;to accept it in faith,
at a time when historical criticism has attained a power
against which Rome is impotent, and when its conclusions
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
pass into the literature and the common consciousness
of all thinking men with a rapidity hitherto
unprecedented. The works will soon be counted not
by hundreds but by thousands, which relate and make
capital out of the fact that from the year 500 to 1600
deliberate fraud was at work in Rome and elsewhere
for disseminating, supporting, and finding a basis for, the
notion of infallibility. If they imagine in Rome that
they can escape this power by means of the Index and
similar fulminations, such as some French Bishops have
hurled at Father Gratry, that is like sending a couple
of old women with syringes to put out a palace on fire.
</p>

<p>
The leader and oracle of the infallibilists, Archbishop
Manning, knows something of the contradictions of history
to his pet dogma. He has heard something of the
long chain of forgeries, but he demonstrates to his
associates by a bold method of logic, that it is an article
of faith that is at issue here, and that history and
historical criticism can have nothing to say to it. <q>It
is not, therefore, by criticism on past history, but by
acts of faith in the living voice of the Church at this
hour, that we can know the faith.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pastoral on Infallibility of the Roman Pontiff</hi> (Longmans), p. 126.</note> The faith which
removes mountains will be equally ready&mdash;such is
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
clearly his meaning&mdash;to make away with the facts of
history. Whether any German Bishop will be found
to offer his countrymen these stones to digest, time will
show.
</p>

<p>
Of what French infallibilists are capable has been
evidenced in the case of Bishop Pie of Poictiers, who
is, next to Plantier of Nîmes, the leader of this
faction. He introduces into his Lenten Pastoral the
history of Uzza, who wanted, with a good object, to
support the tottering Ark, and was punished by being
burned to death. The Ark, he says, is the Church and
its doctrine, and whoever touches it with the best intentions,
be he layman or priest, commits a grievous
crime and audacious sacrilege, which must bring down
on his head the most terrible wrath of God. The
animals, which draw the waggon containing the Ark,
are the Bishops. If then, proceeds Pie, any of these
oxen swerve from the road and kick (<foreign rend='italic'>regimbent</foreign>), there
are plenty more at hand to bring back the cart into the
right track, for&mdash;and here the oxen suddenly become
horses (<foreign rend='italic'>coursiers</foreign>)&mdash;all the steeds of the sacred cart do
not stumble at the same time. Thus does this prelate
expound to his flock the position of the majority and
minority at the Council, and for their full consolation
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
he adds: <q>Moreover there is one supreme and divinely
enlightened driver of the cart, who is liable to no error,
and he will know how to deal with the shying and
stumbling of the horses.</q> According to Bishop Pie
therefore, the waggon of the Church is sometimes
drawn by horses&mdash;the Opposition who make <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>sou-bresaut</foreign>
and <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>écarts</foreign>; sometimes by steady-going oxen&mdash;the
great majority,&mdash;and among these last the Bishop of
Poictiers with amiable modesty reckons himself. If
the readers of the <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Zeitung</hi> doubt whether a
highly respected leader of the majority and member of
the Commission on Faith has really written such nonsense,
I can only refer them to the document itself,
which will no doubt be reprinted in the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> or
<hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi>.<note place='foot'>It is also quoted in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal des Débats</hi> of March 12. [This same
Bishop opened the debate on the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Romano Pontifice</hi> by arguing
that the Pope must be infallible, because St. Peter was crucified head
downwards. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. infr.</hi> Letter <ref target='Letter_XLVI'>xlvi</ref>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
There are many indications that the wishes of the
clique of zealots, who wanted to get the infallible Pope
made out of hand on St. Joseph's day, will not be realized,
but that a longer interval will have to be allowed.
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> <q>on Faith</q> prepared by the Commission,
viz., by the above-named Bishop Pie, and containing
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
the philosophical and theological matter for the Council,
was to have been distributed last week, and even
Bishops of the minority had received professedly confidential
notice of it; but no such distribution took
place. So the Session of this week too will fall through,
and it is not easy to see how this first fruit of the
Council can well be imparted to the expectant world
before Easter. And here I constantly come across the
view that the postponement of the discussion on the
grand <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>, with the article on infallibility,
is done with a purpose. The Opposition is still
too strong and compact; it is hoped that some members
will be detached from it every week, and that several
will leave Rome; some Austrians are gone already.
Everything depends on making the Opposition so small
and weak, that they may be walked over, and may seem
only to exist as a captive band of German Barbarians
to grace the triumphal procession of the Latins, and
then to be surrendered to those <q>exécuteurs des hautes
œuvres de la justice de Rome,</q> MM. Veuillot and Maguelonne,
the editors of the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Correspondance
de Rome</hi>.<note place='foot'>The <hi rend='italic'>Unita Cattolica</hi> of March 12 makes its Roman correspondent say
that to-day the Bishops are signing in crowds a Petition to the Presidents
of the Council, demanding that the discussion of the article on infallibility
may take precedence of all other business, because they long to put an end
at one blow to the scandal of the Liberal Catholics and Gallicans. But
Margotti's journal at the same time urges patience on its readers, because
decorum must be preserved, as far as may be.</note> This delay is of course a severe trial of
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
patience for the majority who are hungering after the
new bread of faith.
</p>

<p>
I will not conceal that even among the highest
Roman dignitaries the infallibilist dogma provokes
expressions of discontent. Are they honestly and
sincerely meant? The voting will show. The <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>mot
d'ordre</foreign> has gone forth to correspondents of foreign
journals, to say that the whole Opposition is thoroughly
broken up, and that some are deserting and the rest
running away. But as yet these are wishes rather than
facts. As far as I can see, the French and German
Bishops, who wish to maintain the ancient doctrine of
the Church and reject the new dogma, hold firmly
together. Some Bishops said, directly after the publication
of the supplementary <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on infallibility, that
their only choice lay between a schism or a false
doctrine; nothing else was left them except to resign
their Sees. And your readers would be astonished if
I could venture to mention their names&mdash;names of the
highest repute.
</p>

<p>
The war of extermination against the Theological
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
Faculties of the German Universities is to be energetically
carried on. The Bishop of Ratisbon's measure is
only a premonitory feeler. Some particular exceptions
however might be made, as long as the chairs were filled
by pupils of the Jesuits. The German College is now
to be the nursery for professors of theology and
philosophy at German Seminaries and High Schools.
This reminds one of the Alexandrian Psaphon, who
kept a whole aviary of parrots, and taught them to
scream, <q>Great is the God, Psaphon,</q> and then let
them fly, so that they carried over land and sea the
fame of his godhead. In Rome there is fortunately an
abundance of such aviaries. There are colleges here
for England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany and
Hungary, Belgium, Poland, and North and South
America, and thousands of their inmates have already
been indoctrinated in Psaphon's fashion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirtieth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, March 20, 1870.</hi>&mdash;At last the greatest theologian
of Catholic England, in fact the only man of
learning there who would be called in Germany a real
theologian, has spoken out in the great controversy.
Dr. Newman is superior of the Birmingham Oratory.
It has long been notorious that he deplored the condition
of the English (Catholic) Church, which has for
many years been brought under the convert yoke, and
sympathized with the old Catholics, both clergy and
laity, who are now crushed under it; so much so, that
the convert party there tried to brand him with the
reputation of heterodoxy, and strangers intending to
visit the illustrious Oratorian were warned not to incur
suspicion by doing so. Newman had accordingly
maintained a persistent silence in the controversies
going on in England, desirous as everybody was and is
to know his judgment upon the question which is now
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
<q>gladius animam Ecclesiæ pertransiens.</q> But in the
midst of this silence he had opened his heart, in a letter
to a Bishop who is a friend of his own, on the uncomfortable
and dangerous position into which an <q>aggressive
and insolent faction</q> has brought the Church,
and disturbed so many of the truest souls. He says:<note place='foot'>[It seemed better to give the Letter itself, as published <q>by permission</q>
in the <hi rend='italic'>Standard</hi> of April 7, rather than to translate the secondhand,
though remarkably accurate, paraphrase given in the German text. It
addressed to Bishop Ullathorne.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>... Such letters, if they could be circulated,
would do much to reassure the many minds
which are at present distressed when they look towards
Rome.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Rome ought to be a name to lighten the heart at
all times, and a Council's proper office is, when some
great heresy or other evil impends, to inspire hope and
confidence in the faithful; but now we have the
greatest meeting which ever has been, and that at
Rome, infusing into us by the accredited organs of
Rome and of its partisans (such as the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> [the
<hi rend='italic'>Armonia</hi>], the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>, and the <hi rend='italic'>Tablet</hi>) little else than
fear and dismay. When we are all at rest, and have
no doubts, and&mdash;at least practically, not to say doctrinally&mdash;hold
the Holy Father to be infallible, suddenly
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
there is thunder in the clearest sky, and we are told to
prepare for something, we know not what, to try our
faith, we know not how. No impending danger is to
be averted, but a great difficulty is to be created. Is
this the proper work of an Œcumenical Council?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>As to myself personally, please God, I do not
expect any trial at all; but I cannot help suffering
with the many souls who are suffering, and I look with
anxiety at the prospect of having to defend decisions
which may not be difficult to my own private judgment,
but may be most difficult to maintain logically
in the face of historical facts.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>What have we done to be treated as the faithful
never were treated before? When has a definition <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de
fide</foreign> been a luxury of devotion and not a stern, painful
necessity? Why should an aggressive, insolent faction
be allowed to <q>make the heart of the just sad, whom
the Lord hath not made sorrowful</q>? Why cannot we
be let alone when we have pursued peace and thought
no evil?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I assure you, my lord, some of the truest minds are
driven one way and another, and do not know where to
rest their feet&mdash;one day determining <q>to give up all
theology as a bad job,</q> and recklessly to believe henceforth
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
almost that the Pope is impeccable, at another
tempted to <q>believe all the worst which a book like
Janus says,</q>&mdash;others doubting about <q>the capacity possessed
by bishops drawn from all corners of the earth
to judge what is fitting for European society,</q> and then,
again, angry with the Holy See for listening to <q>the
flattery of a clique of Jesuits, Redemptorists, and converts.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Then, again, think of the store of Pontifical scandals
in the history of eighteen centuries, which have
partly been poured forth and partly are still to come.
What Murphy inflicted upon us in one way M. Veuillot
is indirectly bringing on us in another. And then
again the blight which is falling upon the multitude of
Anglican ritualists, etc., who themselves, perhaps&mdash;at
least their leaders&mdash;may never become Catholics, but
who are leavening the various English denominations
and parties (far beyond their own range) with principles
and sentiments tending towards their ultimate absorption
into the Catholic Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>With these thoughts ever before me, I am continually
asking myself whether I ought not to make my
feelings public; but all I do is to pray those early
doctors of the Church, whose intercession would decide
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
the matter (Augustine, Ambrose, and Jerome, Athanasius,
Chrysostom, and Basil) to avert this great
calamity.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>If it is God's will that the Pope's infallibility be
defined, then is it God's will to throw back <q>the times
and moments</q> of that triumph which He has destined
for His kingdom, and I shall feel I have but to bow
my head to His adorable, inscrutable Providence.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You have not touched upon the subject yourself,
but I think you will allow me to express to you feelings
which, for the most part, I keep to myself....</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus writes Newman in most glaring contrast to
Manning. The latter was long nothing but his admiring
disciple, and does not possess a tenth part of the
learning of his master. He owes simply to his infallibilist
zeal acquired in Rome his elevation to the
Archbishopric of Westminster, to which the Pope
appointed him, in anticipation of his present services,
against the will of the English Catholics and the election
of the Bishops. The Roman correspondent of the
<hi rend='italic'>Standard</hi> having published extracts from Newman's
letter, he took occasion to come forward and say that
he had no wish to conceal that he <q>deeply deplored
the policy, the spirit, the measures of various persons
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
lay and ecclesiastical, who are urging the definition of
that theological opinion</q> (of papal infallibility), while
on the other hand he has <q>a firm belief that a greater
power than that of any man or set of men will overrule
the deliberations of the Council to the determination
of Catholic and Apostolic truth, and what its
Fathers eventually proclaim <emph>with one voice</emph> will be the
Word of God.</q>
</p>

<p>
No one knows better than Newman that, next to the
Jesuits, two of his old Oxford friends and disciples, Manning
and Ward, are the chief authors of the whole infallibilist
agitation. Well for him that he does not live
in Manning's diocese! In the English clerical journals,
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Weekly Register</hi>, the fact has lately several times
come to light, that English priests who utter a word
against infallibility are promptly reduced to silence by
threats of suspension and deprivation. Every infallibilist,
who has the power, is also a terrorist, for he feels
instinctively that free and open discussion would be
the death of his darling dogma. Under these circumstances
it is very significant that some of the English
Bishops are bold and honest enough to speak their
minds plainly, to the effect that the English Catholics
had gained all their political rights on the repeated assurance,
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
and with the express condition, that the doctrine
of papal infallibility would not be taught and
received in the English Church, and that on that
ground they have felt bound to repudiate this opinion.
The chief among these Bishops are Clifford, Bishop of
Clifton, and Archbishop Errington.<note place='foot'>[Archbishop Errington was Cardinal Wiseman's coadjutor with right of
succession, but was arbitrarily deprived of the post by the Pope, on his
declining to resign it. His name was the first of the three sent to Rome
by the Chapter of Westminster for the vacant Archbishopric on Cardinal
Wiseman's death, the other two being Clifford and Grant. All three were
passed over in favour of Dr. Manning.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
I can give you the precise facts of the affair about
Montalembert's Requiem from the most authentic
sources, and it is worth while to do so, for it speaks
volumes on the present state of things. The news of
his death had reached Rome some hours, when a considerable
number of foreigners, chiefly French, were
admitted to an audience with the Pope. Immediately
after the first words of blessing and encouragement,
which they had come to request of him, Pius went on
to speak of the man whose death had just been announced
to him, saying that he had done great services
to the Church, <q>mais il était malheureusement de ces
Catholiques libéraux qui ne sont que demi-catholiques.
Il y a quelques jours il écrivait des paroles</q>&mdash;here the
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
Pope made a pause, and then proceeded&mdash;<q>Enfin,
j'espère qu'il est bien mort</q>&mdash;or probably <q>qu'il a fait
une bonne mort</q>&mdash;<q>L'orgueil était son principal défaut,
c'est lui qui l'a égaré.</q>
</p>

<p>
While this was going on in the Vatican, Bougaud,
one of the Vicar-Generals of the Bishop of Orleans, was
inviting his countrymen from the pulpit of the French
church of St. Louis to a Requiem for the illustrious
dead, to be held next day in the church of Ara Celi.
Archbishop Merode, Grand Almoner of the Pope and
brother-in-law of Montalembert, had so arranged it, because
it is an ancient privilege of the Roman patricians
to have funeral services solemnized for them in this
church, and Montalembert had been named a patrician
by Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> in recognition of his services in restoring
the States of the Church and bringing back the Pope
to Rome. He had contributed more than any of his
contemporaries to that restoration, and it was he whose
speech in the National Assembly at Paris in 1848 had
decided the question of the Roman expedition. Bougaud
had also mentioned that. Many had heard on the
day before the service that it had been suddenly forbidden;
nevertheless at the appointed hour in the
morning about twenty French Bishops appeared with
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
many priests and a large assemblage of laymen, the
<foreign rend='italic'>élite</foreign> of the French visitors now in Rome. There before
the entrance of the church they found M. Veuillot, the
old and implacable opponent and accuser of Montalembert,
standing among a group of sacristy officials, who
announced to all comers that the Pope had forbidden
any service being held or any prayers offered there
for the departed Count. They thought this incredible
and forced their way into the church, and here the
sacristans informed them that, by special order of the
Pope, not only was the intended Requiem stopped but
the usual masses must be suspended, as long as the
French remained in the church. By degrees the congregation
broke up, and about an hour afterwards, when
the church was empty, a French priest contrived to say
a low mass in a side chapel.
</p>

<p>
It was probably Banneville who intimated to the
Pope, at his audience for taking leave on the 17th,
what a feeling this had created in French circles in
Rome, and what impression it must produce in France.
So on the morning of Friday the 18th, to the amazement
of the court officials, the Pope went to Sta. Maria
Transpontana, an out-of-the-way church, without his
usual cortége. Several Bishops passed the church on
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
their way to the Council, and were surprised to see the
Pope's carriage waiting at the door, as they knew
nothing of what had taken him there. In the church
the Pope sent orders to a Bishop to say mass <q>for a certain
Charles,</q> at which he assisted, and the following
notice then appeared in the <hi rend='italic'>Giornale di Roma</hi>: <q>His
Holiness, in consideration of the former services of
Count Montalembert, ordered a mass to be celebrated
for him in Sta. Maria Transpontana, and himself assisted
at it from the tribune.</q> Meanwhile the journalists
were instructed to say in their correspondence columns,
that the prohibition had been issued, because the
Requiem was meant to be made into a demonstration.<note place='foot'>[This explanation, that the Requiem <q>was intended rather as a political
demonstration than a religious act,</q> was elaborately insisted on in
the <hi rend='italic'>Tablet</hi> of March 28, which added the guarded but equally gratuitous
statement that <q>the Bishop of Orleans, <emph>it appears</emph>, intended to speak at
the funeral service;</q> winding up with the somewhat remarkable comment
that <q>the prudence and the charity (!) of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> have been equally conspicuous
in the affair.</q> The world hardly seems to see it.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
That insinuation implicates Archbishop Merode also,
who resides in the Vatican, for he had given the order.
The charge of pride, which the Pope brought against
Montalembert, will excite astonishment and something
more in France, where it was precisely his gentleness
and modesty that had made him so universally beloved.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirty-First Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, March 21, 1870.</hi>&mdash;A feeling of weariness,
lethargy and disgust has been forced on many Bishops
by the treatment they have received and the whole
course of affairs in the Council up to this time. The
news of its dissolution would be welcome tidings to
their ears. And not only strangers, but many residents
here, would joyfully hail their deliverance from the
existing situation; even one of the Legates said lately
that, if the Council were to be suddenly dissolved by a
death, the Church would be freed from a great distress.
The Assembly Hall alone would suffice to disgust a
prelate with the idea of taking part in a Council
for the rest of his life. Yet they are obliged to
sit hours in this comfortless chamber, without understanding
what is said. A sense of time unprofitably
wasted is the only result of many a sitting
for men, to whom at home every hour is precious for
the care of a large diocese. They say that, for the first
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
time since Councils came into being, the Bishops
have been robbed of their essential and inalienable right
of free speech on questions of faith; that they are compelled
to vote, but not allowed to give reasons for their
vote and bear witness to the doctrine of their Churches.
They complain that, though they can hand in written
observations, no one but the Commission of twenty-four
knows anything about them, and that for the Council
itself and their fellow Bishops they can do nothing.
The Commission will perhaps present a summary report
of a hundred of these memorials and counter
representations, according to the new order of business.
This means that the work carefully matured by a Bishop
through weeks or months of severe study will be summed
up in two or three words, and in the shape it is thrown
into by a hostile Committee. If the Bishops regard it as
an intolerable oppression at home to have to submit their
Pastorals for previous inspection to their Governments,
here they can have nothing printed, even after it has
undergone the censorship.
</p>

<p>
It is no mere phrase, when the Bishops say in their
Protest against the new order of business that their
consciences are intolerably burdened, and that the Œcumenical
character of the Council is likely to be assailed
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
and its authority fundamentally shaken (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>labefacteretur</foreign>).
They consider the arrangement for deciding doctrines by
simply counting heads intolerable, and they recognise as
of immeasurable importance, and the very turning-point
of the whole Council (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>totius Concilii cardo vertitur</foreign>), the
question as to the necessary conditions of a definition of
faith binding the consciences of all the faithful. The
Pope wants to have a new article of faith made by the
Council, on the acceptance or rejection of which every
man's salvation or condemnation is henceforth to depend.
And now this same Pope has overthrown the
principle always hitherto acknowledged in the Church,
that such decrees could only be passed unanimously,
and has made the opposite principle into a law.
</p>

<p>
The Opposition Bishops are well aware that any
regular examination and discussion of the infallibility
question is rendered impossible by the nature of the
Council Hall and the plan of voting by majorities.
They have therefore proposed to the Legates that a
deputation of several Bishops chosen from among themselves
should be associated with the Commission on
Faith, or with certain Bishops of the majority, to discuss
the form of the decree, and that, when they have
come to a common understanding, the formula as finally
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
agreed upon should be submitted to the vote of the
Council in full assembly. The authorities will not
readily yield to this demand on many accounts, and
chiefly because what Tacitus said of the Roman people
1800 years ago is well understood at Rome now, <q>Juvit
credulitatem nox et promptior inter tenebras affirmatio.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was a prudent foresight which led the Pope so
strictly to prohibit the Bishops from printing anything
here during the sitting of the Council; the Jesuits of
the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> must retain their exclusive monopoly of free
speech. But such conferences as the minority wished
for were no less dangerous than printing, and would
naturally lead to the grounds of their decision being
made public. They have been summoned to affirm, not to
deny, and <q>promptior inter tenebras affirmatio.</q> Meanwhile
the Germans say that a thorough sifting of the
question is the first thing necessary to be insisted upon,
and that for two reasons: first to satisfy their own consciences,
and secondly for the sake of their flocks. For
they would not think it enough to enforce the new
dogmas on the faithful of their dioceses by mere official
acts and by referring them to the authority of the Council,
which is ultimately reduced to the authority of the
Pope, but would feel bound to give them sufficient
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
reasons for its acceptance; and they have not been able
to discover the cogency of these reasons themselves.
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> considers this superfluous. He feels his infallibility,
as he says, and therefore thinks it very scandalous
that the Bishops do not choose to be content with
this testimony of his feeling. However, the negotiations
with the Legates about these conferences are
still going on.
</p>

<p>
It must be allowed that there is not the slightest
exaggeration in the words of the seventy-six protesting
Bishops. It is strictly true that the new order of business,
if it is carried out, must raise the greatest doubts
as to the Œcumenical character of the Council among
all thinking Catholics, especially such as are familiar
with the history of Councils. And it is undeniable that
this would excite a terrible disturbance in the Church,
a contest the end of which cannot be foreseen. The
Jesuits are now stirring the fire with the same assiduity
and malicious pleasure as their predecessors in the
Order of 1713 and the following years, when the whole
of France and the Netherlands was plunged into a state
of ecclesiastical strife and confusion by the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unigenitus</hi>,
which they procured. They enjoy such contests,
and have always carried them through with the merciless
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
harshness which is peculiar to them, relying on the
strength of their organization. It may sound hard that
the Order should so often be reproached with making its
members at once accusers and bailiffs, but they would
themselves consider this rather a note of praise than of
blame.
</p>

<p>
The retribution for their conduct in 1713 and afterwards
came in 1763 and 1773. But the Order, or at
least its Roman members, who are all-powerful through
the favour of the Pope, have no fear of such consequences
now. A Jesuit can make a home for his theology,
now here now there. If the Order is driven from
one country, it is received into another; its property is
moveable and can be transferred easily and without loss,
and moreover it possesses, so to speak, an itinerant
mint in its carefully elaborated skill in the direction of
female souls, whether lodged in male or female bodies.
They are thorough adepts too in the speculations of the
money market, and manage their transactions in banknotes
as successfully as the most practised merchant, so
that they are quietly but surely recovering their prosperity
in many cities of the Italian Kingdom, even in
Florence, while all other Orders have been suppressed
there. So they are well equipped and in excellent
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
spirits for meeting the future. If their system of doctrine
is now raised to full dominion by Pope and Council,
and if they succeed in the next Conclave in procuring
the election of a Pope thoroughly devoted to them and
resolved to carry on the present system, the ship of the
Order will ride majestically on the waves of future
events, and fear no storms. A thoroughly well-informed
man has assured us that the Pope said the other day to
a Roman prelate, that <q>the Jesuits had involved him
in this business of the Council and infallibility, and he
was determined now to go through with it, cost what it
might. They must take the responsibility of the results.</q>
A very similar statement was made by the
Emperor Francis <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> He said that <q>he could not tell
how his finance minister would answer hereafter for
having precipitated so many men into poverty and
misery by establishing a national bankruptcy.</q>
</p>

<p>
For the fourth or fifth time since the opening of the
Council, the ultramontane correspondents have been
instructed to say, that the acoustic defects of the Hall
have been remedied through new arrangements. This
is not true; the speeches are never understood in many
parts of the Chamber, not even where the secretaries sit.
Meanwhile the Pope has conceived a desire to appear
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
again in the midst of the Bishops and hold a Solemn
Session. Hitherto he has been invisible and generally
unapproachable to his <q>venerable brethren,</q> as he officially
styles them. The last time the assembly saw
him was at the unsuccessful Solemn Session of January
6, when the Bishops had to go through the useless
ceremony of swearing oaths, in order to fill up the
vacant time. For Pius does not feel that there is the
slightest need for ascertaining the views of the Bishops
about the measures in hand, or their wishes and proposals,
and hearing their report of the state of Church
matters in their own countries. He stands too high
for that. A French prelate remarked lately that the
Council does not thrive, because the Pope stands at
once too near it and too far from it&mdash;so near that he
robs it of all freedom, so far that there is no community
of feeling and views and understanding.
</p>

<p>
There has never indeed been a period in Church
history where it has been made so palpably plain to
the Episcopate how much the name of <q>brother,</q>
which the Pontifex gives to every Bishop, is worth, and
how immeasurable is the gulf between the <q>brother</q>
on the Roman throne, the Pope-King, and the brother
in Paris or Vienna or Prague.
</p>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<p>
On the 16th a part of the first <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was distributed
in a revised form, and a General Congregation was held
upon it on the 18th, at the very time when the Pope
was hearing a mass for Montalembert in reparation for
his treatment of the illustrious dead on the 15th and
16th. He wanted to hold a Solemn Session on the 25th,
and thought there would be some decrees ready to be
published. In defiance of the order of business the
Bishops had only a day and a half, instead of ten days,
allowed them to get acquainted with the revised text.
However, so large a number of speakers sent in their
names, and so many new difficulties came to light, that
Pius had once more to abandon his design of proclaiming
new articles of faith on that day to the expectant
world. It looks as if the fourth month of the Council
would pass by with as little result as the three first.
Easter Monday is already named as the period fixed for
publishing the first doctrinal decree. Meanwhile a new
power has been introduced in the person of the Jesuit,
Kleutgen. He had been condemned some time ago by
the Holy Office on account of a scandal in a convent.
But he has now been rehabilitated, as the Jesuits have
no superfluity of theologians, and is to take part in
drawing up the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>. The time fixed for sending
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
in representations on the infallibility decree has been
extended for ten days more, to the 25th. There is no
lack of criticisms and counter-statements; the Bishops,
although foreseeing that their intellectual progeny will
be strangled directly after birth, seem anxious to gain
the satisfaction of saying, <q>dixi et salvavi animam
meam.</q> The German Bishops remember the assurances
they gave at Fulda. The Archbishop of Cologne reminded
the faithful of his diocese, as late as Feb. 9,
of this Pastoral, to set their minds at rest. To-day,
March 21, in view of the infallibilist <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> and the
new order of business, he would no doubt hardly think
it prudent to say any longer to the Germans, <q>Be confident
that the Council will establish no new dogma,
and proclaim nothing which is not written by faith and
conscience on your hearts.</q> The Germans will now be
curious to see the circumlocutions and explanations
appended, in the fresh Pastorals compiled after the
fabrication of the new dogma, to the Pastoral issued
from the tomb of St. Boniface.
</p>

<p>
The Bishops should take care that they are not, like
the eagle in the Libyan fable, struck with arrows
feathered from their own wings. Banneville, who
succeeded two men very unacceptable in Rome, Lavalette
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
and Sartiges, was amicably received, and found it
agreeable to keep on the best footing with Antonelli,
and to treat the whole affair of the Council easily
and superficially. Whatever he said was always very
mildly expressed. It was so convenient to enjoy the
favour both of the Pope and the Secretary of State, and
to be commended by the majority of the Council as
a pious and enlightened statesman. The differences
between him and Count Daru were accordingly inevitable.
For Daru appreciates the extent of the danger,
not only as a statesman but as a zealous Catholic, while
Banneville's one thought has ever been to please the
Roman authorities, so that a French prelate said to him
shortly before his departure, <q>Pensiez-vous que vous
étiez ambassadeur auprès de Jésuites?</q> And thus at
last the necessity of instructing him has been recognised
at Paris. But at the same time Bishop Forcade of
Nevers has been sent there, intrusted with the mission
of representing Banneville's conduct to the Government
as exactly right, and advocating the views and
desires of Antonelli and the majority of the Council.
He has told them at Paris that the majority do not want
to hear anything of the admission of a French ambassador
to the Council&mdash;which is credible enough&mdash;but
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
that the Government has nothing to fear from the
decrees, for the Court of Rome would in any case
respect the Concordat. Antonelli, as may be seen,
abides by his panacea. The only question is whether
they are disposed at Paris to be paid with such diplomatic
counters. Meanwhile it has been rumoured that
Count Daru would send a memorial to the Council.
To the Council? Say rather to the Pope and his
Secretary of State. This putting forward of the Council,
whose freedom and self-determination the Roman
Court is neither able nor willing to anticipate, is a
device which no one can take seriously. The Bishop of
Orleans in his last publication has pierced a hole in the
mask, which renders it nearly useless. He remarks
(p. 54), <q>Whatever is to come before the Council can
only come through the Commission appointed by the
Pope, that is ultimately through himself. He is the
master, the sole and absolute master, with whom it
rests to admit a proposal or set it aside.</q>
</p>

<p>
Antonelli says that no ambassadors can be admitted,
for if it were conceded to the French, it could not be
refused to other powers, Austria, Bavaria, or even
Prussia. He is quite right there. It has been a main
object from the first with this Council to give a striking
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
example of the entire exclusion of the lay element
in ecclesiastical deliberations. It is just because the
Governments and States are so deeply concerned in
the projected decrees, because their rights and laws
and their whole future are affected, that they are not
to be heard or admitted. In presence of the representative
of his Government, many a Bishop would think
twice before assenting to a decree flatly contradicting
the laws and political principles of his country. And
then the admission of ambassadors would break through
the mystery, and make the strict silence imposed on
the Bishops almost useless. A large number of them,
and above all the entire Opposition, would be very
glad of this, but for that very reason the ruling powers
detest it the more. As a foretaste and practical illustration
of what the maxims of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> will
lead to, when made into dogmas, it is worth while to
notice the decision issued by the Pope and his Penitentiary
in September 1869, when this Schema had
just been drawn up, on the question whether a priest
could swear to observe the Austrian Constitution. To
take the oath absolutely was forbidden; he can only
take it with an express reservation of the laws of the
Church, and&mdash;which is very significant&mdash;he must state
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
publicly that he only takes the oath, even with this
reservation, by virtue of papal permission. That is a
new and very important step on the road to be trodden
with the aid of the Council. Every clergyman is to be
reminded, and to remind others, in merely discharging
a simple civil obligation, that he is dependent on the
Pope in the matter, and may not properly speaking
swear civil fealty and obedience to the laws without
papal permission, not even in the conditional form which
makes the oath itself illusory. This is quite after the
mind of the Jesuits, who have always shown a special
predilection for the doctrine that every cleric is not a
subject and citizen with corresponding rights, but simply
a subaltern and servant of the Pope. This is a prologue
to the twenty-one Canons of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>.
</p>

<p>
I have just learnt from the <hi rend='italic'>Kölner Volkszeitung</hi> that
the chaplain of a prelate here charges me with a gross
falsehood in reference to the words of the Pope. He
appeals to the Paris <hi rend='italic'>Union</hi>, which has the words used
by the Pope, <q>Je suis la voie, la vérité, et la vie,</q> with the
passage inserted by the editor. I had cited the words
from the <hi rend='italic'>Observateur Catholique</hi> of 1866 (p. 357), where
they are authenticated by the signature of an ear-witness,
MacSheeby, and correspond entirely with the statement
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
of the <hi rend='italic'>Union</hi>. But in the <hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi>, which was not in my
reach, a totally different version is given, which has
no similarity to that authenticated by Roman correspondents
in the <hi rend='italic'>Union</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Observateur</hi>, and does not
connect the words, <q>I am the way,</q> etc., with the Pope
at all. It must remain uncertain after this whether
the version of the <hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi> or of the two other journals
is the genuine one.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Letter_XXXII'/>
<head>Thirty-Second Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, March 28, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The Bishops who have
attacked the new order of business, because it brought
into view the possibility of a dogmatic definition being
carried without the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consensus moraliter unanimis</foreign>, received
the desired answer in no doubtful form at the
sitting of Tuesday, the 22d. The measures of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> for a month past have been unmistakably contributing
more and more to produce a worthy and loyal-hearted
attitude among the minority. After long dallying,
Rome has brought the secrets of her policy a little
too boldly and conspicuously into view. Hardly was
the domination of the majority in matters of faith fixed
by the stricter <foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign>, when the Pope had the proclamation
of his own infallibility proposed in the most
arrogant form. On this followed the attempt to press
it to an immediate decision, and then the determination
to admit no ambassadors of the Governments. If these
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
proceedings were not enough to lay bare the perilous
nature of the whole situation, the Pope and the zealots
of his party supplied the remaining proof,&mdash;the former,
by his conduct about Falloux, about Montalembert on
the day the news of his death arrived, about the Munich
theologians in secret consistory, and about the so-called
Liberal or <q>half-Catholics</q> on every occasion; the
latter by their growing impatience about the infallibility
definition, and their assurances that there is no
real opposition to this dogma, and that, if there was,
it could not hold its ground after the promulgation had
taken place. And so the opponents of the decree must
know at last that they have to deal with a blind and
unscrupulous zeal, not with a theological system carefully
thought out and placed on an intellectual basis;
that the contest has to be carried on against the whole
power and influence of the Pope, and not, as had been
maintained with transparent hypocrisy, only against
the wishes of the noisy and independent party of the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> and its allied journalists. They begin to use
more earnest and manlier language, the language of
clear apprehension and conscientious conviction. If the
comments handed in last week on the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>,
and the protests against any hurrying of the discussion
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
on it, were known to the world, the Catholic Episcopate
and the strong reflux current here would appear in a
very different light from what might be gathered from
the previous course of things. Not a few of these
opinions drawn up by the Bishops breathe a truly
apostolic spirit, and deal with the Roman proposals in
the tone of genuine theology. An influential theologian
of a Religious Order has pronounced of one of them,
that it exceeds in force and weight the treatise which
appeared in Germany last year, <hi rend='italic'>Reform of the Church
in Her Head and Her Members</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reform der Kirche an Haupt und Gliedern.</hi></note> It has been urged by
English prelates that it concerns their honour to resist
the promulgation of a dogma, the explicit repudiation
of which by the Irish Bishops was an efficacious condition
of Catholic Emancipation. The American Protest
contains a more threatening warning than the
German, and the German is stronger than the French.
</p>

<p>
After these declarations the attitude of the minority
was clearly defined, and invincible by any foe from
without. Their contention is, that no right exists in
the Church to sanction a dogma against the will and
belief of an important portion of the Episcopate, and
that only by abandoning any claim to such a right can
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
the Council be regarded as really Œcumenical. To
be quite consistent, the minority ought to take
no further part in the Council till this point, on the
decision of which they rightly hold its authority
to depend, is settled; for their protest implied the
doubt whether they were taking part in a true or only
a seeming Council, whether they were acting in union
with the Holy Ghost or co-operating to carry out a
gigantic and sacrilegious deception. Yet the words
expressly stating this doubt, and making the distinct
withdrawal of the theory of voting dogmas by majorities
a condition of any further participation in the proceedings,
were not adopted into any of the Protests.
This implied that the signataries would appear in the
next General Congregation, that they refrained from a
suspicious attitude, and were unwilling to interpret the
ambiguous order of business <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in malam partem</foreign>, until
facts compelled them to do so. A conflict which might
have such incalculable results was to be avoided, till
necessity made it a positive duty; and that was not
the case as long as a favourable interpretation of the
<foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign> continued possible.
</p>

<p>
Thus the minority committed the strategical blunder
of postponing a conflict which they saw to be inevitable,
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
and when they could not know whether any more
favourable opportunity for entering on it for the benefit
of the Church would occur in the future. There is
hardly anything doubtful or open to double interpretation
in the order of business, when more closely
examined. Every Bishop sees quite clearly that it is
specially arranged for overcoming the opposition of the
minority, and will be used without scruple for that end.<note place='foot'>[The correctness of this prediction was conspicuously illustrated in the
<foreign rend='italic'>coup</foreign> of June 3. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. infr.</hi> Letter <ref target='Letter_LII'>lii</ref>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
And who knows how many members of the present
Opposition, if once the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> applies its last lever, will
have strength to resist to extremities? how many are
ready, by humble submission or by resigning their Sees,
to quiet their consciences and sacrifice their flocks to
error? There are men among them better fitted for the
contest against the principle formally enounced in the
revised order of business, than for the contest against
infallibility. The Bishop of Mayence, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, passes for
one of the strongest and most decided opponents of the
<foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign>, which I mention as a point of great importance
at this moment. The resolve of the protesting
Bishops, to avoid the threatened conflict at present, can
only be justified if another and better opportunity for
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
defending the cause of the Church occurs in the future
course of the Council and before any decision is arrived
at. Had they been willing, after handing in their protests,
to go on quietly joining in the proceedings, without
doing anything to give emphasis to the step they
had taken, they would in fact have bent under the yoke
of the majority. They only needed to keep silent:
that implied everything. For it would necessarily be
assumed that they had withdrawn or forgotten their
protests, and to continue to act upon and submit to the
new order of business themselves would imply that they
had renounced their resistance to any of its particular
details. It was therefore all the more essential for
them to let it be clearly known how far their concessions
would extend, and what was their final limit.
Unless they did this, they would either seem not quite
sincere, or would have really accepted the <foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign>
with its obvious consequences. The Council, the Presidents,
the Pope, the expectant Catholic world without,
had a right to know their real intentions, and
whether they meant to adhere to their declarations. The
first voting on the propositions of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>
could not fail to decide this point. Thus it became
a necessity to put this question of principle in the
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
front at the reopening of the deliberations of the
Council.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the concessions of the Presidents and the
majority on some points had elicited a more friendly
feeling in the Opposition. The discussion on infallibility
was postponed, and the first <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was returned
from the Commission with important modifications.
Even the shameful treatment of Montalembert could
not altogether destroy this conciliatory state of feeling.
Ginoulhiac, the learned Bishop of Grenoble, who was to
be preconised as Archbishop of Lyons on Monday the
21st, undertook on the 22d to meet the discreet concessions
of the infallibilists in a kindred spirit. He
was indeed obliged to make his speech on the Tuesday,
though he had not been preconised on the day before.
The French, who have no Cardinal&mdash;for Mathieu's custom
is to go away at any critical moment, and he was not
then returned&mdash;had gladly left to one of the Austrian
Cardinals the less pleasing duty of declaring their attitude
towards the <foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign>. Schwarzenberg did but
slightly glance at it in his speech and yet was called
to order. Archbishop Kenrick of St. Louis, one of the
most imposing figures in the Council, touched on the
theme more closely, and dwelt on the office of Bishops
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
as witnesses and judges of faith, in the sense which
forms the basis of the opposition of the minority.
Lastly, Strossmayer ascended the tribune, and then
followed a scene which, for dramatic force and theological
significance, almost exceeded anything in the
past history of Councils. He began by referring to
that passage at the opening of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, where
Protestantism is made responsible for modern unbelief&mdash;<q>systematum
monstra, mythismi, rationalismi, indifferentismi
nomine designata.</q> He blamed the
perversity and injustice of these words, referring to
the religious indifference among Catholics which preceded
the Reformation, and the horrors of the Revolution,
which were caused by godlessness among
Catholics, not among Protestants. He added that the
able champions of Christian doctrine among the Protestants
ought not to be forgotten, to many of whom
St. Augustine's words applied, <q>errant, sed bonâ fide
errant;</q> Catholics had produced no better refutations
of the errors enumerated in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> than had been
written by Protestants, and all Christians were indebted
to such men as Leibnitz and Guizot.
</p>

<p>
Each one of these statements, and the two names, were
received with loud murmurs, which at last broke out into
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
a storm of indignation. The President, De Angelis, cried
out, <q>Hicce non est locus laudandi Protestantes.</q> And
he was right, for the Palace of the Inquisition is hardly
a hundred paces from the place where he was speaking.
Strossmayer exclaimed, in the midst of a great uproar,
<q>That alone can be imposed on the faithful as a dogma,
which has a moral unanimity of the Bishops of the
Church in its favour.</q> At these words a frightful
tumult arose. Several Bishops sprang from their seats,
rushed to the tribune, and shook their fists in the
speaker's face. Place, Bishop of Marseilles, one of the
boldest of the minority and the first to give in his
public adhesion to Dupanloup's Pastoral, cried out,
<q>Ego illum non damno.</q> Thereupon a shout resounded
from all sides, <q>Omnes, omnes illum damnamus.</q> The
President called Strossmayer to order, but he did not
leave the tribune till he had solemnly protested against
the violence to which he had been subjected. There
was hardly less excitement in the church outside than
in the Council Hall. Some thought the Garibaldians
had broken in: others, with more presence of mind,
thought infallibility had been proclaimed, and these
last began shouting <q>Long live the infallible Pope!</q>
A Bishop of the United States said afterwards, not
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
without a sense of patriotic pride, that he knew now
of one assembly still rougher than the Congress of his
own country.
</p>

<p>
This memorable day has already become the subject
of myths, and so it is no longer possible to define with
certainty how many prelates were hurried into these
passionate outbreaks. Some speak of 400, some of
200; others again say that the majority disapproved of
the interruption. The excitement was followed next
day by a profound stillness, which was not broken even
when Haynald and the North American Bishop Whelan
said very strong things. It seemed as if a sense of
what they owed to the dignity of the Council and a
feeling of shame had got the better of those turbulent
spirits. But enough has occurred to show the world
what spirit prevails here, and what sort of men they
are who support infallibilism. That up to this time
this Council does not deserve the respect of the Catholic
world, is the least point; it is of more importance,
that an internal split in the Church is more and more
revealing itself. Henceforth it will no longer be possible
to throw in the teeth of genuine Catholics their
compromising or dishonourable solidarity with error
and lies, for this has given place to an open and avowed
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
opposition. On one side stands the small but morally
powerful band of those who accept Strossmayer's noble
words with head and heart, on the other a crowd of
<q>abject</q><note place='foot'>This word (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>niederträchtigen</foreign>) was lately used by a German Bishop.</note> fanatics and sycophants. This division is of
supreme significance for the future course of the Council,
because it strengthens and consolidates the minority
in their harmony and determination, and obliges them
to take a further step, as soon as the majority have made
it unmistakably clear that they will not acknowledge and
respect their claim to prevent a dogmatic definition.
</p>

<p>
The Presidents, by denouncing Strossmayer's speech
but not the interruption of it, as it was their duty to do,
gave evidence of an undisguised partiality, and justly incurred
the suspicion of sympathizing with the shouters
and not with the speaker, and thinking the proclamation
of infallibility allowable without the moral unanimity
of the Council. Accordingly a categorical
demand was sent in to them to declare themselves on
this point, and, in case of their giving no answer,
another last step is reserved, which will have the
nature of an ultimatum and will bring the Œcumenicity
of the Vatican Council to a decisive test. And so
it may be said that the Bishops of the minority have
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
delayed but not wavered. The moment for a decisive
move, which may test the existence of the Council,
must come when a dogmatic decree has to be voted on.
This crisis seemed to have arrived on Saturday, March
26, when the preamble of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi> was to
have been voted on. Various amendments had been
proposed, one very important one by Bishop Meignan of
Chalons, in which the Fathers were designated as definers
of the decrees, and another equally important,
implicitly containing infallibility, by Dreux-Brézé,
Bishop of Moulins. Moreover this preamble contained
the obnoxious passages immortalized by the glowing
eloquence of Strossmayer. The antagonistic principles
seemed to have reached their ultimate point. Votes
were to be taken on dogmatic decrees before any agreement
had been come to on the necessary conditions of
such voting. At the last moment the Presidents resolved
to evade the crisis. The very day before the
sitting, Friday, March 25, Cardinal Bilio went to the
authors of the amendments and persuaded them to withdraw
them, and so on Saturday the text of the preamble
was brought forward without any amendment. Nor
was there any voting on that either, but they passed at
once to the discussion on the first chapter of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>,
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
in which the Primate of Hungary (Simor) made an
adroit and conciliatory speech as advocate of the Commission
on Faith. The debate then proceeded. By
the eleventh article of the new order of business, every
separate part of a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> must be voted on before the
next can come on for discussion.
</p>

<p>
It was a breach of this rule to pass on straight to the
first chapter of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, without having voted on the
preamble. The Bishops asked themselves what this
meant. Was it intended, by the withdrawal of the
amendments and the abandonment of the discussion, to
declare the preamble tacitly accepted? Was it intended
to correct that objectionable passage? But the
wording of the <foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign> was too strict to allow of
that being done except in the General Congregation.
It seemed at any rate as if more prudent counsels had
prevailed and it was intended to avert the dreaded contest
on the main principle by concessions, so as to pass
such decrees as were possible, that they may be unanimously
promulgated in the Easter session. Thus time
would be gained for loosening the compact phalanx of
the Opposition, and at the same time getting it more
deeply implicated in a compromising actual acceptance
of the new order of business, in its form as well as its
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
spirit. This double danger is always imminent, but in
fact the Opposition as yet has suffered no loss.
</p>

<p>
We are at the end of the fourth month of the Council,
and yet they have not dared to put one decree to
the vote. The amendments, which were so obnoxious,
have disappeared. The passage about unbelief being
the offspring of Protestantism, which Strossmayer
assailed, will perhaps be corrected, though in an irregular
manner. The simple and sanguine spirits among the
Opposition Bishops exult over a victory obtained. One
of the most famous of them exclaimed, <q>It is clear the
Holy Ghost is guiding the Council.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirty-Third Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, March 30, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Yesterday (the 29th) the
first voting in Council took place, on the preamble of
the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>. As I told you in my last letter,
this preamble had been objected to by Strossmayer on
account of the passage representing rationalism, indifferentism,
the mythical theory of the Bible and unbelief
as consequences of Protestantism. Several amendments
had been proposed; two of them I have mentioned
already, one introduced by Bishop Meignan of Chalons,
substituting for a mere approbation of the decree a
statement expressly guarding the right of the Episcopate
to define,&mdash;the other, proposed by Dreux-Brézé,
designed to smuggle in the infallibilist doctrine in a
form requiring a sharpsighted eye to detect it.<note place='foot'>The original text ran: <q>Quâ sane benignitate ipsius ac providentiâ
factum est, ut ex Œcumenicis omnibus Concíliis, et ex Tridentino nominatim
amplissima in universam Catholicam Familiam utilitas dimanaverit;</q>
the amendment of Dreux-Brézé runs: <q>Quâ sane benignitate ipsius ac providentiâ factum est, ut <emph>licet omnibus Ecclesiae necessitatibus per ordinarium
Summi Pontificis regimen et magisterium satis fuerit provisum</emph>, tamen ex
Œcumenicis omnibus Conciliis,</q> etc.</note> Many
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
infallibilists had reckoned on the victory of their
dogma last week by means of this amendment. The
Presidents had got some of the amendments withdrawn
on Friday, the 25th, but these two they suffered to remain.
They were equally sure that the first would be rejected
and the second accepted by the majority; nay they
counted on a far larger majority for the passage implying
infallibility than for the rejection of Meignan's proposal,
and hoped that this occasion would tend to
bring to light unmistakably the power and extent of
the infallibilist party.
</p>

<p>
At the beginning of the sitting of Saturday, the 26th,
the exact regulations for the method of voting were first
read out, and this was repeated a second time to preclude
any risk of misapprehension. Yet it was announced
immediately afterwards that there would be
no voting, and this unexpected change was made during
the Session and in presence of the Fathers. There had
in fact been a kind of fermentation going on since
Tuesday, the 22nd, when Strossmayer's affair occurred.
The justice of his criticism on the passage about Protestantism
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
and unbelief had become evident to many;
at least fifteen Bishops made representations to the President
about it as late as the Friday. According to a very
widely-spread report, one of them was the Bishop of
Orleans and the other the Bishop of Augsburg. But in
spite of this, and of the prospect of a catastrophe, which
the union of the Germans made imminent, they seem to
have gone into Saturday's sitting firmly resolved not to
yield. Yet a last attempt succeeded. After the mass,
when all were assembled, a Bishop handed in a paper
with a few lines to the Presidents, on which two of
them at once left the Hall. Meanwhile the order of
the day and the method of voting was read out. On
their return the decision was announced; the preamble
was withdrawn to be amended. It was an English
Bishop whose paper produced such important results.<note place='foot'>[It is understood to have been Bishop Clifford of Clifton.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
On Monday, the 28th, the preamble was distributed
in its revised form; Dreux-Brézé's objectionable amendment
had disappeared, the passage about Protestantism
was altered, and even the style was improved. Primate
Simor, speaking in the name of the Commission, had
already stated officially that the Bishops were at liberty
to subscribe the decrees by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>definiens subscripsi</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, to use
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
the ancient conciliar formula by which the Bishops used
to describe themselves as defining the decrees. And
thus the principle for which Meignan, Strossmayer, and
Whelan had contended, was conceded. In this form
and after these concessions the preamble could no longer
be opposed.
</p>

<p>
The strength of the minority has been proved, though
in an irregular manner. But obviously this gives an
opening to the majority for similarly setting aside the
order of business when it is inconvenient for themselves.
Beyond a doubt the spirit of conciliation has triumphed
over all opposition at the critical moment. And it may
be distinctly said that this result was attained, partly
through the firm attitude of the minority, partly through
the prudent and abundantly justified yielding of the Presidents.
By this discreet procedure they have declined all
responsibility for the conduct of those who, on Tuesday
the 22d, would hear of no objections to that portion of
the preamble. And their doing this so decidedly makes
their silence on the other matter, which caused such an
outbreak, the more surprising, and some explanation of
it is all the more necessary.
</p>

<p>
The amended preamble was then accepted unanimously.
But the chapter <hi rend='italic'>De Deo Creatore</hi> did not pass
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
so easily, though it might have been expected that, at
the end of four months, the Bishops would have arrived
at some agreement on that point. The main difficulty
arose from the tendency again to smuggle in statements
favourable to infallibility, and paving the way for its
definition by a sidewind. The first paragraph, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
opens thus, <q>Sancta Romana Catholica Ecclesia credit et
confitetur unum esse Deum verum et vivum, Creatorem
cœli et terræ.</q> Two amendments were proposed on
this: (1.) <q>Proponitur, ut initio capitis primi simpliciter
dicatur, <q>Sancta Catholica Ecclesia credit et confitetur,</q></q>
etc. (2.) <q>Proponitur, ut in capite primo verba <q>Romana
Catholica Ecclesia</q> transferantur, ita ut legatur
<q>Catholica atque Romana Ecclesia.</q> Sin autem non
placuerit Patribus, ut saltem comma interponatur inter
verba <emph>Romana</emph> et <emph>Catholica</emph>.</q> There was a great deal of
discussion about this word <q>Romana.</q> The German
Opposition Bishops exhibit a better organization than
the French. In spite of the great majority, it was announced
that the voting would be only provisional, a
<q>suffragatio provisoria,</q> and it is probable that the
first chapter will be revised in this point, as in several
others, before being presented for definitive acceptance.
</p>

<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>

<p>
It is very noteworthy that the Italian Government
has made no attempt to utilize the new complications,
and the introduction of a new system of policy in
France very hostile in principle to Roman absolutism.
The Roman question has gone to sleep at the moment
when a solution seemed to be in view. Indifference
has taken the place of zeal at the very time when zeal
had a prospect of success. Nowhere is the reason of
this seeming apathy better understood than at Rome.
The Italians are patient, because they see the settlement
approaching in the natural course of things and
without violence: they know that with the death of
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> a far-reaching change must ensue. His successor
will enter on the difficult inheritance under
very different conditions.
</p>

<p>
The change of sovereigns will, in another point of
view, be a very critical transition for the system dominant
here. There is no point the non-Italian Episcopate
with the foreign Cardinals and the Great Powers,
are so united upon as throwing open the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and
the Sacred College to foreigners. A Papal election
under present circumstances might be very dangerous
for the centralization policy. The hardly-won domination
of that party which Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> has made into his
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
instrument would be menaced, for after a long pontificate
an election is always a reaction and not a continuation.
The numerous elements of opposition, which
have so long been suppressed, combine then for mutual
aid. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> has created the College of Cardinals
himself, but his successor will be the creation of the
College. The ruling party runs the risk of getting a
Pope who will no longer serve it and carry on its
policy, and it is certain that the next Pope will be
much weaker than the present one in his relations
with the Governments, the Cardinals and the Episcopate.
Much, very much, of the present resources of
the Papacy depends on the person of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, and will
be buried with him. It is the interest of all who are
concerned in the continuance of the existing system,
that his personal influence should survive his reign.
</p>

<p>
He alone can hand on to his successor his own
special connection with France, and he alone can secure
the choice of a successor in the Jesuit interest. But,
to accomplish that, he must survive his own pontificate,
must himself fix on the desired successor, must himself
inaugurate him and support him with the whole weight
of his personal influence. And thus the bold and ingenious
device has been started of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> abdicating,
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
and a new election being held during his life. It is said
not to be quite a new project; in the honeymoon of the
Council, just after the New Year, it first began to be
somewhat inconsiderately spoken of. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> is nearly
eighty, two years older than is generally said. He was
elected June 16, 1846, and will therefore, on June 16,
1870, complete the twenty-fourth year of his pontificate.
But there is an old saying, universally believed in
Rome, that no Pope will reign twenty-five years, as it
was the exclusive privilege of St. Peter to be Pope for
a quarter of a century. <q>Non numerabis annos Petri.</q>
It is a fact that none of the 255 predecessors of the
present Pope has held office for twenty-five years; even
those elected at thirty-seven, like Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> and
Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>, died earlier. So according to this belief, which
is not confined to the vulgar, Pius has only one year
more to live. But in spite of his age he is healthy and
wonderfully strong, and, as he belongs to a long-lived
family, he has the prospect of still living some time,
only not as reigning Pope. It is no pleasing prospect
for a man, in whose character there is a large element
of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>amour propre</foreign>, to be treated as the setting sun,
while all are speculating on his speedy death. It
would be another thing, at the very moment of his
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
glorious triumph over the Council and after gaining
infallibility, to resign it, to decline to enjoy his success,
to renounce this mighty power in the first moment of
fruition, and to transfer the splendid inheritance to
the hands of a younger man. Thus next June might
witness the most brilliant jubilee, and an example be
given of such imposing grandeur that the world has
seen nothing like it, of such wisdom and eventful
significance that the present system would be immortalized
and become the heirloom of the Papacy for all
ages. The Pope would retire into a glorious privacy,
like the founder of the North American Republic after
his second Presidentship, and taste the honours of an ex-Pope,
unequalled by any former ceremonial splendour,
and close his days in a position of unprecedented elevation.
This seductive dream has found little aliment
in the course of the Council hitherto. The plan
would be at bottom a conspiracy against existing law,
against Cardinals, Governments, and the Episcopate,
and notwithstanding its dazzling lustre, would make
the very worst impression on the Council. A victorious
Pope might conceivably attempt to carry it out,
but in the present situation it would be a dangerous
challenge.
</p>

<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>

<p>
The abdication of a Pope is not without precedent
in history. In 1294 a Pope took this step, which has
never since been repeated; Celestine <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> resigned the
papal office, to which he felt himself unequal. After a
long and quarrelsome Conclave, the Cardinals, at their
wits' end, had elected the pious recluse of Einsiedlen, and
dragged him from his mountain home; a few months
later they got tired of him and urged him to abdicate,
and he complied. Many doubted whether a Pope
could resign; they thought that, according to the law
established by the Popes themselves in the decretals,
no Pope could dissolve of his own power the bond
which unites him to the Church and the Church to
him. It would require a superior in the hierarchy to
do this, and none such exists. It had first therefore to
be decided that a Pope could resign, and Celestine
settled this by a special Bull. After that he solemnly
and publicly laid down his office. Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> succeeded,
who shut up the unfortunate man in a mountain
fastness, where he died soon afterwards in a damp
unhealthy dungeon.
</p>

<p>
In the strictly initiated circles, where the above project
is most definitely spoken of, the man selected by
Pius for his successor is also known; it is Cardinal
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
Bilio, aged forty-four, who possesses the confidence
equally of the Pope and the Jesuits. He edited the
Syllabus, and assisted the Jesuits in drawing up the
first <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>; in short, Pius would have the satisfaction
of reckoning securely on his carrying on the present
system for many years. Of course, even if the seventeen
or eighteen vacant Cardinals' Hats were given to
men pledged to this scheme, it would still remain a
question whether Pius could succeed in still controlling
the Conclave after his abdication. Many think that
the Cardinals would then, as has so often happened,
elect a very aged man, and Cardinal de Angelis is
named as the likeliest to be chosen.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirty-Fourth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 10, 1870.</hi>&mdash;When it became known that
the Solemn Session for accepting and proclaiming the
first dogmatic decrees was to be held, not on the 11th
April as first intended, but on the 24th, the question of
how this interval should be used came to the front.
For the moment general attention is directed towards
Paris. The answer of Cardinal Antonelli, drawn up by
Franchi, Archbishop of Thessalonica <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign> and one
of the most active curialists in the affairs of the Council,
arrived there March 24. According to the account of
a French statesman, it produced the impression of being
intended for a mediæval king, who could neither read
nor write. The two main points in it are&mdash;(1.) that the
<foreign rend='italic'>Canones de Ecclesiâ</foreign> contain no new claims and do not
affect States which have a Concordat at all, and (2.)
that no ambassador can be admitted to the Council.
</p>

<p>
The French Government oscillated a long time between
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
the counsels of different advisers. The Bishop
of Nevers represented the middle party, at whose head
stands Cardinal Bonnechose; the Bishop of Constantine
and afterwards the Bishop of Coutances might, as members
of the Opposition, have come to a similar opinion.
At first the plan found favour of not sending any
special ambassador to the Council, but accrediting the
ambassador to the Pope for the Council also. France
would thereby have gained the start of Prussia, for it
was hardly to be supposed that a Protestant diplomatist
would claim the right of entering the Council.
So much more important became the question, whether
the Marquis de Banneville, who had meanwhile gone
to Paris to justify his policy of inaction, would be
superseded, or sent back to Rome in this double capacity,
and therefore with increased powers. The latter
course would be a significant concession to the inflexible
Pope, a decided gain for the majority, and therefore a
sensible blow for the Opposition. It would be a practical
proof that Rome had only to resist, in order to
intimidate France, and that the Imperial Government
renounced all further interference with the Council.
That was so obvious that a host of candidates for this
weighty and honourable office were proposed to the
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
minister. Baroche is said to have wished for it;
Cornudet, a friend of Montalembert's, was much talked
of, as well as Corcelles and Latour d'Auvergne, two
men who seemed particularly well fitted to make the
change of persons more acceptable at Rome. For some
time the Duke of Broglie had the best prospect of it,
who stands high among the Catholic laity as a political
historian and student of Church history and the Fathers,
but as a Liberal Catholic he belongs to the party the
Pope hates above all others just now. To appoint him
would have been at once to identify the French Government
with the minority, and might, instead of conciliating,
have led to results most abhorrent to the
amiable and pious character of the Duke.
</p>

<p>
It was also a prevalent opinion that qualifications
should be first attended to, and the best head among
French statesmen be intrusted with this important
mission&mdash;that men should be chosen like Rouher or
Thiers, who had done service to the temporal power,
but who stood quite aloof from the internal feuds of
parties. To accredit them would make the withdrawal
of the Romanizing Banneville less surprising and less
irritating to the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. The Bishops of the middle
party wanted the place for one of themselves. But
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
they are not a body in much favour at Paris, and it was
intimated to them that the best qualified prelates are
not to be found in their ranks. Their representative,
the Bishop of Nevers, came back in a state of irritation
from Paris, where he is said to have found only three
adherents of papal infallibility, two of whom were
women. It is conjectured that the third was the
Nuncio Chigi, who has affirmed that all Paris will
illuminate the day the dogma is proclaimed.
</p>

<p>
The proposal for a Conference emerged again in the
French Cabinet, but was rejected as inappropriate, for
it would necessarily betray the weakness of a disunited
ministry. At last the plan was adopted of sending a
preliminary answer to Antonelli's letter, and waiting
for the result of this before fixing on an ambassador.
And so it was resolved at the beginning of April to
draw up a note, which might at the same time be laid
before the other powers, and serve as the basis for
common action. It was communicated to the various
Governments during last week, and is said to have
been brought to Rome to-day by the Marquis de
Banneville. But the Empress had meanwhile sent to
Rome to get a more definite and authentic report of
the views of the Bishops. But the answer did not
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
reach Paris till after the note had been drawn up and
despatched.
</p>

<p>
The only answer the minority needed to give was to
communicate to the Government the various memorials
they had presented to the Council, for these documents
indicate the only policy which can be pursued with
success, and which must be pursued. They deal not
only with purely theological questions, but with the
management of the Council, with questions of freedom
and right which concern the lay world as much as the
clergy. It is in the nature of things that the Governments
should follow the lead of the Opposition, for to
fall short of this would be to sacrifice their Bishops, while
to go beyond it would be unjustifiable and dangerous.
</p>

<p>
It has now been again declared on the part of the
minority, that their freedom is encroached upon by the
order of business and the way the Presidents conduct
affairs. The changes they asked for were not made,
and their protests remained unanswered. In the
opinion of many Bishops the legitimate freedom of
the Council no longer exists, and over a hundred have
said plainly that it would not be regarded as Œcumenical,
if the question of making dogmatic definitions
on faith and morals against the will of the minority is left
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
doubtful. And this doubt, so far from being removed,
has been changed into certainty at Rome. The Presidents
passed over the demand of the Opposition in silence,
although it threatened and called in question the very
existence of the Council; they did not protect Strossmayer
against the rude interruption which followed on
his asserting the necessity for unanimity, but rather
sided with it. The official press has openly attacked
this view of the minority. Antonelli maintains the
right of the Pope to make into a dogma the precise
contrary of what the Council has unanimously accepted.
According, therefore, to the well-known declarations
already made by the minority, the Council has lost the
character of Œcumenicity, and the See of Rome has
abandoned the ground of Catholicism.
</p>

<p>
The various States must direct their attention to
these points within these limits. They may pronounce
in favour of the prorogation or reformation of
the Council, but they cannot recognise it under its
present conditions on any strictly Catholic principles.
But to desire reforms now, after the experience of four
months, during which the dominant spirit has manifested
itself with such unscrupulous audacity, and after the
determination to force through the infallibilist system in
<pb n='410'/><anchor id='Pg410'/>
doctrine and practice in its crudest form by deceit and
violence has become unmistakably clear, would betray
a rare simplicity. The whole thing is settled by the
question about majorities; and on that point, after what
has passed, Rome can hardly yield now without giving
up her claims altogether. An infallibility, which is
subject to the veto of the minority of Bishops, ceases to
be infallibility; the condition of moral unanimity in
the Episcopate excludes it. And so the Council could
not be saved without involving the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> in a contradiction.
A Council dominated by a Pope who holds
himself infallible is <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>a priori</foreign> a nonentity. The Governments
can only help it by securing it a speedy
euthanasia. If they wished to act worthily and sincerely
and in accordance with the gravity of the situation,
they would have to declare, in union with the
most influential Bishops, that the arbitrary and crooked
way of managing the Council makes the establishment
of any important decrees impossible; that the Vatican
Council has lost all moral authority in the eyes of the
world, and that the best thing would be to put an end
to it with the least sacrifice of its dignity.
</p>

<p>
The Governments might use such language, but only
after an open breach between the minority and the
<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>
Presidents. The minority must have spoken their last
word, and they have not done so yet. The interest of
the Catholic Church requires that the Bishops should
have the necessary time for forming and carrying out
their resolutions, and that the crisis should not be precipitated
by a catastrophe. The Council can do no good by
the decrees fathered on it, but it has already done much
good by the declarations of different sections of its
members, by the speeches of individual Bishops, and
the spirit manifested by a portion of them, and it will
do much more very shortly. More than once have
words been spoken there which have fired millions of
hearts, have strengthened the bond of love and unity
among Christians, and have openly indicated the real
defects and the real remedies required for them. This
seed of a better future in the Catholic Church will not
be lost, but will bring forth abundant fruit. In each
successive utterance genuine Catholic principles have
come out more and more clearly, as the progress of the
combat has forced them on the minority. The false
problems, only hypocritically pre-arranged to be laid
before the Council, disappear more and more. It
becomes more and more clearly ascertained and acknowledged,
that the contest is one of first principles, for the
<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>
maintenance of divine truths and institutions against
arbitrary violence and impudent deceit.
</p>

<p>
New declarations on the rights of the State and the
conditions of a really Œcumenical Council, directly condemning
the new Roman system of the Syllabus and Infallibilism,
may perhaps appear in a few days. While
in the highest degree critical and threatening for the
Council, they might form the basis of sounder developments
for the future. If particular States are to bring
the matter to a decisive issue, it seems desirable that
the Bishops should come forward with their resolutions
designed to promote this end.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirty-Fifth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 12, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Veuillot says, in the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>
of April 2, that there are three great <q>devotions</q> in
Rome, the Holy Sacrament, the holy Virgin, and the
Pope. For the moment, and in regard to the Council
and all that concerns the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, the devotion to the
Pope is of course the chief affair. How that devotion
may best be erected into the supreme law of religious
thought and feeling&mdash;how to effect that henceforth, in all
questions of the spiritual life, every one shall turn only
to Rome and take his orders and look for certainty from
thence alone&mdash;this is the task the Council has to achieve;
all else is subordinate, or is merely the means to an end.
</p>

<p>
Next to the Jesuits Veuillot is unquestionably the
man to whom infallibilism is chiefly indebted; and
when it is made a dogma, a grateful posterity must
give honourable place to his name among the promulgators
of the new article of faith. He is much too
<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>
modest, when he says his rôle in the Church is only
that of the door-keeper who drives out the dogs during
divine service. Veuillot is much more to his readers
than any Father of the Church. Continual dropping
hollows out the stone, and for years past Veuillot has
been familiarizing his readers, in numberless articles
where the copious verbiage concealed the poverty of
thought, with the notion that papal infallibility is the
first and greatest of all truths. His journal is read
even in Rome in the highest circles, and read by those
who read nothing else, except perhaps Margotti's <hi rend='italic'>Unità
Cattolica</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> is very successful in the business of
stirring up the inferior clergy against their bishops in
the dioceses of Opposition prelates, and getting them
to present addresses in favour of infallibilism. In the
number of April 2, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, they are directed to get their
petitions for the new dogma sent here through the Paris
nunciature, and to take particular care that they are
printed&mdash;<q>de plus, il importe de les publier.</q> The
<hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi> has invented a peculiar means of advancing the
good cause. It announces that the Freemasons are the
people who disseminate writings against papal infallibility,
and then intimates to the Italian Bishops the
<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>
important fact that the minority of the Council are
affiliated to Masonic Lodges.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Unità Cattolica</hi>, the organ of Margotti, the
Italian Veuillot, has 15,000 subscribers and 100,000
readers, and has more influence than all the 256 Italian
Bishops put together. Their pastorals are powerless as
compared with this daily paper, and they themselves
are divided between their fear of the powerful Margotti
and their regard for the judgment of the educated
classes. But as most of these last are indifferentists,
and give no moral support to a Bishop, the journalists
carry the day, who treat every opponent of the pet
Roman dogma as Veuillot does.
</p>

<p>
An Anglican clergyman named Edward Husband,
who not long since became a Catholic, has again left
the Church, because the dispute about papal infallibility
and the extravagant <foreign rend='italic'>cultus</foreign> of Mary were too great
scandals for him. It is only to the exasperation caused
by proceedings at Rome, as an English statesman has
written word, that we owe the passing in the House of
Commons by a majority of two of a Bill for the civil
inspection of Convents, which had always previously
been rejected. The minority had done their best to avert
it, but were overruled, and Newdegate&mdash;a person who
<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>
was hitherto almost regarded as a joke&mdash;triumphed.
All reports from England confirm the belief that this is
only one symptom of the hostile state of feeling rapidly
spreading there. Among English statesmen there is
not one, within the memory of man, who has shown
such sympathy for Catholics and their Church as Gladstone,
as neither have any had so extensive a knowledge
of theological and ecclesiastical questions. Yet he too
took occasion, during the debate of April 1 on the Irish
Education question in the Commons, to speak his mind
on the tendencies of the Roman Jesuit party. After
quoting an unfavourable comment of his former colleague,
Sir George Grey, on the demands of the Irish
Bishops, he proceeded to say, with raised voice and in
most emphatic tones, amid the <q>loud cheers</q> of the
House, that <q>events have occurred and are occurring,
in a great religious centre of Europe, of such a character
that it is impossible for a statesman to feel himself in
nearer proximity with the opinions of the Roman
Catholic Hierarchy than he stood four years ago.</q><note place='foot'>See <hi rend='italic'>Times</hi> for April 2, 1870.</note>
</p>

<p>
I have already pointed out that, as soon as the new
articles of faith are defined, their effects will be manifested
in the education question throughout pretty well
<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>
the whole of Europe. This enrichment of the creed will
at once be repaid with losses and humiliations of the
Church in the popular schools, and in the whole
system of education. In England this is making itself
felt already. The agitation for secularizing the schools,
the immense majority of which have hitherto been denominational,
gains continually in force and range under
the influence of the news from Rome. The <hi rend='italic'>Daily
News</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, said that the fact of ultramontanes desiring
denominational schools was quite enough to convince
Protestants of the superiority of secular and national
schools. Yet Manning goes on asserting in the Vatican,
that the infallibilist dogma will be the powerful
magnet to draw Protestants by thousands into the
Church. They are only too glad to believe him.
</p>

<p>
You know already that the Roman Jesuits have
declared it, in the last number of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, to be a
wicked error to require moral unanimity of the Council
for a dogmatic decree. They call it a Gallican heresy
to make the consent of the whole Church, or the whole
Council, a condition of dogmatic decisions. A simple
majority is quite enough, for it is ultimately the will
and mind of a single individual, viz., the Pope, wherein
resides the whole force and authority of the decision.
<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>
If he assents to the judgment of a minority of the
Bishops, it thereby becomes a law of faith for the whole
Christian world; but if the majority is with him, all
shadow of doubt vanishes. Whenever a controversy
arises, whether in the scattered or assembled Church,
it is the Pope's office to settle the difference by his
decisive sentence, and to say, <q>This is truth: whoever
believes it belongs to the Church, and whoever believes
not, let him be accursed.</q> Once again it is clear that
the Jesuits are of a different mind from the rest of the
world. The world supposes that the Pope is to be
declared infallible by the Council, and that only then
will this infallibility become an universal article of
faith. The Jesuits of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, on the contrary, think
that the Pope&mdash;and he alone&mdash;is already and ever has
been infallible, and that all authority in matters of
faith is merely a light streaming forth from him and
merging in his authority; the sole ultimate ground on
which the Council, whether unanimously or by a
majority, can declare the Pope infallible is because it
knows that former Popes have held themselves to be
infallible, and that the present Pope believes in and
<q>feels</q> his own infallibility. And thus on the Jesuit
theory we have the symbol of eternity, the snake biting
<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>
its own tail. Why must we regard the Pope as infallible?
Because he says so, and every one must
believe his word on pain of damnation. Why must
we believe his word? Because he is infallible. And
why are the Bishops of the whole world summoned
to Rome? To bear witness to this logic of the
Jesuits and the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, much like the compurgators
in German law. The Pope affirms, <q>I am infallible,</q>
and the 700 Bishops affirm that he is a trustworthy
witness, and because he says so it is certain.
The infallibilist Bishops admit the new theory of the
legal force of dogmatic decrees of a majority. They
too say, <q>When the Pope adheres to the majority, the
article of faith is already defined, and to reject it is
heresy.</q> They too revolve in the logical circle of the
Jesuits. <q>Infallibility is always on the side taken by
the Pope.</q>
</p>

<p>
The pretence of impartiality maintained for some
time by the Vatican, and under which Antonelli
sheltered himself against diplomatic inquiries and
warnings, has now been abandoned. The Pope has
taken his side in the most emphatic way; he feels and
denounces as a personal injury every hesitation about
the projected dogma, and his expressions of displeasure
<pb n='420'/><anchor id='Pg420'/>
grow constantly bitterer, and are sedulously disseminated,
so that many Bishops are already terrified or
driven into the infallibilist camp by the dread of his
biting reproaches, for his words are immediately spread
about in their dioceses and pass like a coin from hand
to hand. Every work that appears anywhere in favour
of his pet dogma is rewarded and sanctioned by a commendatory
papal Brief, as being excellent, profoundly
learned and conclusive, while the opponents of the
dogma are branded in these documents as fools, blind
or wicked assailants of what they inwardly know to be
the truth. The <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> lately contained three such
papal missives on the same day.<note place='foot'>[The English <hi rend='italic'>Tablet</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Dublin Review</hi> have received similar papal
commendations.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> Meanwhile the opportunity
of an allocution is seized for whetting the consciences
of the Bishops of the minority, and telling
the world how impure are the motives of their opposition,
and how virtuous and noble-hearted are the
prelates of the majority, the Italians and Spaniards.
On March 28, the <hi rend='italic'>Osservatore Romano</hi> published a
speech addressed by Pius to the Oriental prelates and
papal vicars of the Latin rite, in which he said, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>totidem
verbis</foreign>, that in the representative of Christ was renewed
<pb n='421'/><anchor id='Pg421'/>
what happened to Christ Himself before the tribunal
of Pilate. Pilate suffered himself to be terrified by the
assurance that, if he delivered Christ, he was no friend
of Cæsar, and gave him up through fear of men. And
so now, when the principles of eternal life and the
rights of the Church and the Papal See are at stake,
they are attacked by men who call themselves friends
of Cæsar, but are really friends of the Revolution.
<q>Be united,</q> added the Pope, <q>with me, and not with
the Revolution, and be not misled by the desire for
popularity and applause; to me and not to public
opinion must your minds be directed (<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>poiche dovete tener
rivolte le menti a me e non alla opinione publica</foreign>). Put no
trust in your own lights.</q> And he concluded, <q>On the
basis of humility we will fight for the kingdom of God,
without despairing and without fear of error.</q>
</p>

<p>
Thus does Pius lay bare the egotism and cowardice
of the Bishops who demur to infallibility. They
are afraid of conflicts with the modern State, which
is the product of the Revolution, and are loath to
alienate the educated classes of the Church, which is
mere popularity-hunting. Pius is in earnest in what
he says about humility, and applies it to himself as
well as others; he frequently says that he too is a
<pb n='422'/><anchor id='Pg422'/>
poor sinner, who has his place in the great hospital of
diseased and sinful humanity, but with this difference,&mdash;in
all other mortals sin begets error as its necessary
consequence, but not with him. He is indeed a
sinner, but in his case sin, through a special miracle,
has no influence on the intellect, and when he feels his
own infallibility, it would be presumptuous to dream of
any self-exaltation or flattering illusion.
</p>

<p>
It is of course understood that other and very various
methods are also being made use of to diminish the
numbers of the Opposition. Leave of absence is most
readily accorded to them. It has become visible now to
the blindest eye that the infallibilist dogma is the real
object of the Council, for which alone it was convoked.
The great aim hitherto in all sessions and votings has
been gradually and imperceptibly to bring the Bishops
to the point of practically accepting the decisions of the
majority on questions of faith, and to get them to let
the critical moment for protest and refusal of participation
slip by unused. By this means precedents are
created, and when the crucial question of infallibility
comes on, they will be told that they have already
virtually conceded the principle, and it is now too late
to deny it.
</p>

<pb n='423'/><anchor id='Pg423'/>

<p>
The Governments have made it quite clear that it is
only encroachments on the secular and civil domain,
such as the relations of Church and State, and especially
the twenty-one canons, which give them any anxiety,
and have led them to make representations and
protests. They disclaim all intention of meddling
with questions of pure dogma, and therefore leave
untouched the infallibilist theory, which Count Beust
regards as a mere internal question of Church doctrine.
This admission breaks off the point of all diplomatic
arrows shot from Vienna, Paris, or anywhere else, for
with infallibility the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> possesses all it wants for
the attainment of its ends and the extension of its power
over the social and political domain. Prévost-Paradol
justly remarked the other day in the <hi rend='italic'>Journal des
Débats</hi>, <q>The ministers who are so ready to let the
infallibilist dogma slip through their fingers seem not to
consider that it comprehends everything (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>qu'il emporte
tout</foreign>). If the Pope is declared infallible to-day, he
was infallible yesterday, and, if so, the Syllabus has
precisely the same force and validity as if the Council
had confirmed it.</q> So it is in truth, and moreover the
Bulls and decisions of former Popes, which claim absolute
dominion over the State, become inviolable articles
<pb n='424'/><anchor id='Pg424'/>
of faith. And then again it seems to pacify the Governments
that Antonelli assures them he and his master
are merely concerned with the theory, and have no intention
of at once putting the new articles of faith into practice,
summoning kings before their tribunal, overturning
constitutions, and abrogating laws. On the contrary
the Pope, if his mercy is appealed to, will look favourably
on much belonging to the present civilisation and
order of the State; only of course all this must be regarded
as a mere indulgence which might at any
moment be withdrawn. Meanwhile at Rome the disclaimers
of the Governments of any desire to meddle with
doctrine are sedulously made capital out of for working
on the Bishops. They are referred to in proof that the
whole lay world has nothing to say to this purely
dogmatic question, and that the Governments themselves
treat the matter as politically innocuous, and the
Bishops are admonished to lay aside their foolish resistance
to a doctrine which with the power of the
Pope will also so mightily increase their own.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='425'/><anchor id='Pg425'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Letter_XXXVI'/>
<head>Thirty-Sixth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 13, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi> has
occupied the Fathers in almost daily sessions, and the
Solemn Session for the public voting and promulgation
of the decrees finally completed, which was first
fixed for Easter Monday, has been postponed to Low
Sunday. The number of amendments proposed gives
the Bishops a great deal of labour, if the handling of
these matters in the Council Hall is to be called a
labour. What takes place is this: the Bishop who
wishes to propose an alteration in the text of the
Jesuit draft ascends the tribune and delivers an
address, which as a rule the majority of his auditors
cannot follow. Then he hands the President his
motion, which however is not read, so that the Council
gain their first knowledge of it through the Deputation,
who have the amendments sent in to them&mdash;which of
course are often very contradictory&mdash;printed and distributed
<pb n='426'/><anchor id='Pg426'/>
in the order of precedence. Thus, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,&mdash;there
were no less than 122 amendments proposed on the
third chapter of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, occupying 44 folio pages.
They began to be distributed on April 3, and most of
the Bishops only got their copies on the 4th, when
there was a sitting of the Council, and on the 5th the
voting was to take place, so that most of them had no
time even for a cursory reading: still less was it possible
to give explanations or attempt to come to any oral
understanding or comparison of the various views.
Meanwhile the discipline of the majority continues to be
admirable; they always know exactly how they are to
vote, and obey the signal given as one man. Nor has
there been any repetition of the wild paroxysm of passion
on March 22, which turned the Hall into a bear-garden
of demoniacs while Strossmayer was speaking. Many
who were most conspicuous that day in their screams
and gesticulations, seem to have felt ashamed since,
and have no doubt also received a hint that such
excesses of zeal may injure the good cause. But however
well organized and docile the majority show themselves,
the defects of the order of business, combined
with the bad qualities of the Hall, become very perceptible,
and the result of the many votings is a
<pb n='427'/><anchor id='Pg427'/>
confusion into which the Deputation tries afterwards
to impart some sort of order.
</p>

<p>
Strossmayer has made a representation to the Legates;
at the sitting of March 22 he was called <q>a damnable
heretic,</q> without having given any intelligible occasion
for it, and he expects and demands a public reparation
for this injury in whatever way they deem most suitable.
What is still more important, his conscience has
constrained him to put the question from the tribune,
whether articles of faith are really to be decided by
mere majorities according to the 13th article of the new
order of business. When he expressed his conviction
that moral unanimity was essential in such cases, he
was interrupted by a frightful tumult and could not
say any more.
</p>

<p>
The Legates have given no answer either to the three
representations of the Bishops about the second order
of business with its principle of majorities, or to Strossmayer's
complaint. But on April 1 an admonition of
President de Angelis was again read, directing the
Fathers to be as brief as possible in their speeches,
that they might not produce disgust (<emph>nausea</emph>) in the
assembly by their prolixity or digressions, in which
case they had only themselves to thank for the marks
<pb n='428'/><anchor id='Pg428'/>
of displeasure elicited. This was commonly understood
as an indirect answer to Strossmayer; he had produced
<q>nausea</q> in the prelates, and had therefore no cause
for complaint. That was rather too much for the
minority, and their international Committee of about
30 Bishops resolved on presenting a common protest
to the Presidents against the frequent interruptions and
the wording of the admonition. Meanwhile Haynald
was not interrupted, when he declared his agreement
with Strossmayer. And it is worth notice that the
Presidents have not as yet availed themselves of the
right assigned them by the Pope to cut short the discussion,
and get the speeches of the Opposition put an
end to by the vote of the majority. There was nothing
certainly in the subjects last under discussion to tempt
them to do so. The Bishop of Rottenburg had proposed
that the decree should contain no anathemas on persons
but only on doctrines; the Germans and about six
French Bishops agreed with him, but the rest would
hear nothing of it. But it was significant that the
most extreme section of infallibilists urged that in
mentioning the Church in the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>, the
predicate <q>Romana</q> should alone be affixed to Church,
with a perfectly correct instinct that the complete
<pb n='429'/><anchor id='Pg429'/>
Romanizing of the Church which they desiderate must
lead to the annihilation of its Catholicity, and that the
particular predicate necessarily excludes the universal.
But they did not carry their point.
</p>

<p>
It is the universally prevalent feeling that all these
detailed discussions and motions are mere preliminary
skirmishes in which both parties practise themselves
for the great contest and the decisive blow
to be struck when the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> comes on.
The chief aim is to ascertain how far the minority can
be induced to go, how much they will put up with, and
what can be wrung from them by surprise or by quiet
working on them individually. Public scenes, solemn
protests before the whole world, are what the Legates
want at any price to avoid. When the infallibilist
dogma was to have been carried by sudden acclamation
on St. Joseph's Day, four American Bishops handed in a
paper declaring that, if this were done, they would immediately
leave the Council and announce the reasons
of their departure as soon as they got back to their
dioceses. That took effect.
</p>

<p>
It is perhaps one of the most noteworthy and eventful
changes in the policy of the Papal Court, that it
now strains every nerve deliberately to exclude the
<pb n='430'/><anchor id='Pg430'/>
laity from all share in Church affairs, and endeavours
to hold them aloof in every case where formerly the
Church not only allowed but desired and demanded
their regular participation. Thirty years ago it was
quite different, but since the darling scheme of the
Jesuits for complete ecclesiastical absolutism and centralization
in Rome, both intensive and extensive, has been
adopted, the maxims first avowed by Pius in his instructions
to Pluym, his delegate at Constantinople,
have been acted upon. The Pope there affirms that the
participation of the laity in Church matters has been
the greatest injury to the Church. In Germany and
north of the Alps generally, all who thought they
knew anything of the spirit and history of the Church
had believed just the contrary, and considered those to
have been the most prosperous ages of the Church
when there was a cordial understanding and unsuspicious
co-operation between clergy and laity; and they
pointed to the example of earlier Popes, who attributed
a priesthood to Christian princes, and exhorted them to
take the most active part in ecclesiastical affairs. But
historical reminiscences are of no account here; we must
be content to float on the stream of the present, without
looking backwards or forwards, with the great multitude.
<pb n='431'/><anchor id='Pg431'/>
<q>Fear nothing; I have the Madonna on my
side,</q> said the master the other day to a prelate who
had warned him of the danger incurred by the present
system. That word explains the enigma of our present
situation.
</p>

<p>
The quarrels with the Orientals, which I shall perhaps
relate more fully by and bye, have again thrown a
clear light on the existing condition of things and the
maxims adhered to. In a dispute about the privileges
of a Convent here, an Armenian Archbishop with his
secretary and interpreter were condemned by the Inquisition
to imprisonment in one of the Jesuit houses&mdash;nominally
<q>to make the exercises.</q> The unfortunates
for whom this fatherly correction was decreed,
were to <q>exercise themselves</q> till they were reduced
to submission. They first betook themselves to the
protection of the French embassy, but in accordance
with instructions from Paris they were repulsed. Then
they were taken under the charge of Rustem Bey,
the Turkish ambassador at Florence, who has lately
been residing here and transacting business with
Antonelli. But the Cardinal soon intimated to him
that Catholic priests, of whatever nation, were in Rome
simply subjects of the Pope and under the jurisdiction
<pb n='432'/><anchor id='Pg432'/>
of the Inquisition. So the helpless Armenians had to
succumb, and were favoured with domestic imprisonment,
while a monk of another Order was made Abbot
of the convent. The affair has naturally excited double
astonishment. German, French, and English priests,
who are here in great numbers, have had the unpleasant
surprise of discovering that, according to the theory
accepted here, they belong not only spiritually but bodily
to the Pope, who is the absolute lord of their persons,
and that the Inquisition can seize and incarcerate any
of them at its pleasure. And the occurrence has recalled
some very unlovely reminiscences. Men acquainted
with Roman history have shown that Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>
got Aonio Paleario and Carnesecchi to surrender themselves
and had them burnt by the Inquisition; that
Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> enticed to Rome by a safe-conduct the priest
Fulgentio, who took the side of the State in the Pope's
quarrel with Venice, and had him burnt there as <q>a
lapsed heretic;</q><note place='foot'><q>Relapsum flammi ex lege addixit,</q> says the Dominican Bzovius in his
Panegyric <hi rend='italic'>Paulus V. Borghesius</hi>, Rome 1626, p. 57.</note> that the English Benedictine Barnes,
who was seized on Belgian soil and dragged to Rome,
was first imprisoned in the Inquisition till he became
insane, and then had to die in a lunatic asylum. It is
<pb n='433'/><anchor id='Pg433'/>
true that the Inquisition no longer inflicts torture and
death, but nobody who has once come into its power
would escape without having an abjuration extorted
from him. The best security for a Western priest consists
in the dread of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> of involving itself in
trouble with his Government; were it not so, a foreign
clergyman would be compelled to confine his conversation
with clerics here to the weather, for there is always
the most stringent obligation of denouncing any one
the least suspected of heresy to the Inquisition, and a
German clergyman, who got into any theological talk
could hardly avoid that suspicion, so many would be
the points of difference and opposition.
</p>

<p>
There have been movements among the Hungarian
Bishops, the connection of which is not quite clear. But
the following facts are authentic. Simor, Archbishop
of Gran and Primate, who for two months adhered with
the rest of his countrymen to the minority, has gone
over in the most demonstrative way to the majority,
who pride themselves not a little on their conquest.
It had been previously agreed between the Emperor
and the Pope that he should be made a Cardinal, and
he had been informed of this; but for a Cardinal-designate
before his actual creation to vote against the
<pb n='434'/><anchor id='Pg434'/>
formally and energetically expressed will of the Pope
would be monstrous. Such a thing is quite inconceivable
in Rome. Moreover, before he became Primate, Simor
spoke in favour of infallibilism.<note place='foot'>[It will be seen that Simor, with the other Hungarian Bishops, eventually
voted among the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non-placets</foreign> and signed their protest. Cf. Letters
<ref target='Letter_LXIV'>lxiv</ref>, <ref target='Letter_LXV'>lxv</ref>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> Another Hungarian
Bishop is gone over with him. Other Hungarian
Bishops whom the minority, whether rightly or not, reckoned
deserters, have gone home, and have there, it is
said, represented the state of things in the very darkest
colours, saying that there is no real freedom in the Council
and the minority is breaking up. The Government
at Pesth have consequently sent a confidential agent
here to invite the Hungarian Bishops to escape the
storm and return home. But they replied that the
Government had better provide for the return of those
already gone home, so as to add more strength to the
minority on whom all the hopes of Catholics are
now centred.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='435'/><anchor id='Pg435'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirty-Seventh Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 15, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The <hi rend='italic'>Constitutio Dogmatica de
Ecclesiâ Christi</hi> will receive its definitive form in the
Congregation of Easter Tuesday, but the substance is
already fixed. It received many significant alterations
in the course of discussion, and the ready reception
accorded to it as a whole is due to the many detailed
amendments which have been conceded. These changes
are so important that the spokesman of the Commission,
Pie of Poitiers, said in his closing speech it was
really the work of the whole Council, so that the
Fathers might truly say, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Visum est Spiritui Sancto et
nobis</foreign>.</q> After the insertion of the word <q>Romana</q>
before <q>Catholica Ecclesia,</q> the three first chapters
were accepted in their amended form. The fourth, on
faith and knowledge, was debated only cursorily and
by a few speakers on April 8. But this chapter contains
a passage of the greatest practical importance. At
<pb n='436'/><anchor id='Pg436'/>
the end occur these words: <q>Since it is not enough to
avoid heretical pravity, unless those errors which more
or less nearly approach it are shunned, we admonish all
of the duty of observing the constitution and decrees
where such evil opinions not expressly named here have
been proscribed and prohibited by this Holy See.</q><note place='foot'><q>Quoniam vero satis non est, hæreticam pravitatem devitare, nisi ii
quoque errores diligenter fugiantur, qui ad illam plus minusve accedunt:
omnes officii monemus servandi etiam Constitutiones et Decreta quibus
pravæ ejusmodi opiniones, quæ isthic diserte non enumerantur, ab hâc
Sanctâ Sede proscriptæ et prohibitæ sunt.</q></note>
The Bishops with good reason saw in this passage a
confirmation of the judgments and increase of the
authority of the Roman Congregations, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of the tribunals
through which the Pope exercises his power.
It seemed to them desirable to give due expression to
their objections, and accordingly a request was made to
the President to appoint a further day for this subject.
But as nobody had inscribed his name to speak, the
request was refused and the whole debate was closed on
that day, Friday, April 8. But to avoid the danger of
opposition at the last moment and secure the decrees
being unanimous, a certain concession was made by
announcing that the closing paragraph should not be
voted on till the whole <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>, four chapters of
<pb n='437'/><anchor id='Pg437'/>
which only were as yet ready, should be completed.
Thus a great point was gained,&mdash;a decree on matters of
faith was carried by moral unanimity and not by
surprise, but after a serious though compressed debate,
which helped to win for the views of the minority a
very perceptible influence on the form of the decree.
</p>

<p>
But on the following day, April 9, a notice was
communicated that, as the closing paragraph of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>&mdash;beginning with the words <q>Itaque supremi
pastoralis,</q> etc.<note place='foot'><q>Schematis de fide catholica conclusio, quæ incipit ab his verbis:
<emph>Itaque supremi Pastoralis</emph>, etc., cum de eâ in ultimâ Congregatione generali
non satis explicite actum fuerit, adhuc debet subjici Patrum suffragiis,
antequam ad ferenda suffragia de toto Capite <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> procedatur. Ideo monentur
Reverendissimi Patres, ut nunc in finem <emph>Emendationes de capite
quarto</emph> hujus Schematis propositas etiam ad proximam Congregationem
generalem secum deferre velint.</q></note>&mdash;had not been treated with sufficient
particularity at the last general sitting, it must be again
brought forward for deliberation before the whole
fourth chapter came to be voted upon. The Fathers
were thereby admonished that they might produce their
amendments on the fourth chapter at the next sitting.
This Congregation was held on April 12, when the final
paragraph was put to the vote, and this roused them
from the dream of unanimity. It was observed in the
debate that if the voting on the paragraph were put off
<pb n='438'/><anchor id='Pg438'/>
till the whole <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi> was completed, this would
be putting it off to the Greek Calends. But if the
fixing of this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was undertaken directly after
Easter, the more important subject of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de
Ecclesiâ</hi> must give place to it, and so it might easily
happen that infallibility would not come on at all this
spring. To withdraw the closing paragraph would be
not only not to maintain but to lose that favourite
form of authoritative papal utterance through the
medium of the Roman Congregations, which especially
required to be upheld. Pie of Poitiers insisted on the
fact that the paragraph had been published in the
<hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Zeitung</hi>, and could not therefore without
peril be withdrawn even for the moment only.
</p>

<p>
The Opposition were partly disposed themselves to
treat the passage as unimportant. There were some
who thought that in principle it was right for the
Roman decisions to be respected and a certain authority
attached to them, for this was necessary for the
government of the Church; and the very wording of
the passage distinguished these decisions from matters
defined under anathema. So the minority resolved not
to make any collective resistance to it, and many well-known
members of the Opposition accepted it without
<pb n='439'/><anchor id='Pg439'/>
contradiction. Notwithstanding this, when the whole
fourth chapter came to be voted on on Tuesday, April
12, the desired unanimity was not attained; 83 Bishops
gave a conditional <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> only. They handed in the
grounds of their vote in writing, which seem to have
been of various kinds, for even the Bishops of Moulins
and Saluzzo, who are notorious infallibilists, were
among them. Some, especially English Bishops, may
well have demurred to the designation <q><emph>Romana</emph>
Catholica</q> before <q>Ecclesiâ;</q> others may have thought
it necessary to guard their rights as against majorities;
but far the greater number wanted to repudiate the
concluding passage. The vote was understood here in
this latter sense, and no stone was left unturned to induce
the Opposition to yield on that point. The step
they have taken makes the deeper impression, because it
is known that they have not put forth their full strength.
</p>

<p>
It must be allowed that the final paragraph contained
no actual doctrine which made the resistance of the
Episcopate an absolute duty and required unanimous
consent, but still it is obvious that the Council thereby
sanctioned and strengthened what it ought to have
reformed and limited, and therefore the carelessness
manifested by a portion of the Opposition admits of no
<pb n='440'/><anchor id='Pg440'/>
favourable explanation. For the chief cause of the
weakness and corruption of the Church is to be found
in those Roman Congregations,&mdash;in the principles of
some and the defects of others. The Bishops who
accept the paragraph give their approval, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, to the
Inquisition and the Index, and thereby prejudice not a
little their moral influence and dignity. The vote of
last Tuesday does not accordingly appear to me any
proof of the firm organization or imposing power of the
minority; it only shows what they might accomplish if
they chose, but that they do not choose to do as much
as they can. But the event will show whether the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> holds to its policy of securing unanimity by
prudent and well-timed concessions. The minority
will be urged and entreated first to withdraw their
objections. If that fails, the Court must either give up
the hope of unanimity or accept a very sensible humiliation.
For if the text remains unaltered, those who
have now given a conditional <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> can give no simple
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> next time.<note place='foot'>[Conditional votes, as will be seen, are not allowed in Solemn Sessions,
but only a simple <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> Rome will certainly exhaust all her
arts to avert the scandal of an open opposition in a
Solemn Session.
</p>

<pb n='441'/><anchor id='Pg441'/>

<p>
I said in a former letter that the Opposition had
taken up a position which no enemy from without
could dislodge them from, but this did not imply at all
that all internal dangers are overcome. These by no
means consist in the decomposing influences of hope
and fear which the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> makes such use of, or the
prospect of a Cardinal's Hat, or again in party divisions
at home, which might have disturbed and divided the
French, Austrian and North American Bishops. The
latter danger might have made itself felt at the commencement
of the Council, but constant intercourse
and community of experiences during this winter have
put an end to it. The real disease which has weakened
the minority in the past and threatens it in the future
lies deeper&mdash;the great internal differences of Catholicism,
which are now being brought to a decisive issue, do not
coincide with the antagonism of the rival parties in the
Council, but divide the minority itself. The main
question, exclusive of the immediate controversy and
partly independent of it, which divides Catholics into
two sections so sharply that no sympathy or confidence
can bridge over the gulf, remains unsolved within the
minority and constantly endangers their coherence. The
common designation of Liberal Catholics tends rather
<pb n='442'/><anchor id='Pg442'/>
to obscure than to express the principle of this division.
By Liberal Catholics may be understood those who
desiderate freedom not only <emph>for</emph> but <emph>in</emph> the Church, and
would subject all arbitrary power of Church as well as
State in matters of religion to law and tradition; but
that is the end they aim at, not their fundamental
principle. Such requirements concern the constitution
rather than the doctrine of the Church, law rather than
theology. They are important, but they do not contain
the crucial point of the present contest in the Church.
The root of the matter lies not simply in the relation to
be maintained towards the chief authority in the Church,
but in the right relation to science; it is not merely
freedom but truth that is at stake. It is mainly as an
institution for the salvation of men and dispenser of the
means of grace that the Church has to deal with the
labouring, suffering and ignorant millions of mankind.
And in order to guard them from the assaults of popular
Protestantism, a popular Catholicism and fabulous representation
of the Church has been gradually built
up, which surrounds her past history with an ideal halo,
and conceals by sophistries and virtual lies whatever is
difficult or inconvenient or evil, whatever, in short, is
<q>offensive to pious ears.</q>
</p>

<pb n='443'/><anchor id='Pg443'/>

<p>
But such a transfigured Catholicism is a mere shadow
Catholicism, not the Church but a phantom of the
Church. Its upholders are compelled at every step to
employ various weapons, to ward off any triumph of
their enemies and avoid disturbing the faithful in a
religious sentiment artificially compounded of error and
truth combined. The more the notion of the supreme
glory, and even infallibility, of the Pope was developed,
the greater solidarity with the past became requisite,
that the history of the Popes might not be suffered to
bear witness too strongly against such views. To quote
a significant phrase in constant use here during this
winter, <q>the dogma must conquer history.</q><note place='foot'>[Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supr.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg348'>348</ref>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> A contest
has arisen, not of dogma but of a theological opinion
against history, that is against truth; the end sanctifies
the means. It was held allowable in order to save the
Church and for the interest of souls to commit what
would in any other case have been acknowledged to be
sin. Not only was history falsified, but the rules of
Christian morality were no longer held applicable where
the credit of the hierarchy was at stake. The very sense
of truth and error, right and wrong,&mdash;in a word the
conscience&mdash;was thrown into confusion. Thus, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
<pb n='444'/><anchor id='Pg444'/>
when Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> demanded that the Huguenot prisoners
should be put to death, he did right, for he was Pope and
a Saint to boot. Since Charles Borromeo approved the
murdering of Protestants by private persons, it is better
to approve it than to call his canonization in question.
Or one moral aberration is got rid of by another.
Many of the leading Catholic writers of this century
deny that Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiii.</hi> approved the massacre of St.
Bartholomew,<note place='foot'>[See an exhaustive article on the subject from a Catholic pen in the
<hi rend='italic'>North British Review</hi> for October 1869.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> or that heretics have ever been put to
death at Rome.
</p>

<p>
This spirit, which falsifies history and corrupts
morals, is the crying sin of modern Catholicism, and it
reaches high enough. Of the three men who are
commonly held in France to stand at the head of the
Catholic movement, one wrote a panegyric on Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>,
another under the name of <hi rend='italic'>Religion et Liberté</hi> attacked
absolutism in France while defending the double absolutism
in Rome, and a third vindicated the Syllabus&mdash;all
three thus manifesting the influence of this deplorable
spirit.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand the genuine Catholic, who wishes
also to be a good Christian, cannot separate love for his
<pb n='445'/><anchor id='Pg445'/>
Church from the love of goodness and truth. He
shrinks from lies in history as much as from present
adulation, and is divided by a deep moral gulf from
those who deliberately seek to defend the Church by
sin and religious truth by historical falsehood. This
contrast is most conspicuously exhibited in the question
of infallibility, as one example may suffice to prove.
The principles of the Inquisition have been most
solemnly proclaimed and sanctioned by the Popes.
Whoever maintains papal infallibility must deny certain
radical principles of Christian morality, and not
merely excuse but accept as true the opposite views of
the Popes. Thus the Roman element excludes the
Catholic and Christian. Such differences obviously cut
deep into men's ethical character, and divide them far
more decisively than any striving for common practical
ends or community of interest and feeling can unite them
on the ground of prudence. In presence of so profound
an internal division the question of the opportuneness
of the definition of infallibility assumes a very subordinate
place, and the mere inopportunist is immeasurably
removed from the decided opponent of the dogma.
Between Bishops who consider Popes fallible and those
whose conscience is easy enough to swallow certain
<pb n='446'/><anchor id='Pg446'/>
doctrines of former Popes on faith and morals, and who
do not see any deadly peril for souls in giving a higher
sanction to these dogmas&mdash;between anti-infallibilists
and mere inopportunists&mdash;the difference is far deeper
than the union. The inopportunists stand nearer to the
infallibilists than to those who oppose the dogma on
principle. They are divided from the one party on a
mere question of prudence, from the other on a question
of faith and morality; with the one they are united by
an internal bond, with the other by an external bond,
only which circumstances may dissolve.
</p>

<p>
This is the true explanation of the halting policy so
often observed in the Opposition. The honest opponents
of infallibility wished to secure the support of
those who do not properly speaking share their sentiments.
But they should never for a moment have
forgotten that they have to attack what Gratry has
rightly described as an <q>école de mensonge.</q> And the
greatest honesty and outspokenness is necessary for
defending the honour and truth of Catholicism against
that school. Instead of that they exhibit themselves
in a false light and obscure the situation.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> by his letters to Guéranger and
Cabrière has completely and publicly identified himself
<pb n='447'/><anchor id='Pg447'/>
with that school, at the very moment when Gratry was
so unmistakeably exposing its spirit, and he has made
this still clearer by the distinctions bestowed on Margotti
and Veuillot at the very moment when Newman
characterized them as the leaders of <q>an aggressive and
insolent faction.</q> He said plainly to the French Bishop
Ramadie of Perpignan that <q>only Protestants and
infidels denied his infallibility.</q> His official organ
describes the Opposition as allies of the Freemasons,
and he himself calls all who oppose his infallibility bad
Catholics. It is true that the Opposition has gradually
been brought to make very decided declarations of
opinion, and has itself expressed doubts about the
future recognition of the Council. But that has complicated
its attitude still further. The other party may
ask, <q>Why these doubts about Œcumenicity? The
Bishops of various countries are assembled in great
numbers; the Governments offer no hindrances, and the
Council has united itself with the Pope in the greatest
freedom in the capital city of the Church. Why then
doubt the good results and œcumenical character of the
Council and the validity and future recognition of its
decrees?</q> And the Opposition can only answer, <q>For
the sole and single reason that the Pope destroys all
<pb n='448'/><anchor id='Pg448'/>
freedom of action by his regulations, that he has already
overthrown the ancient constitution of the Church and
exercises a power over the Council incompatible with
the rights of the Bishops and the freedom of the
Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
The French note is to be presented to-day to Antonelli
and next week to the Pope, instead of to the
Council. It is doubted whether Pius will communicate
it to them.<note place='foot'>[He refused to do so.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='449'/><anchor id='Pg449'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirty-Eighth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 17, 1870.</hi>&mdash;It is a good sign that the
minority have at length recognised the imperative
necessity of grappling directly with the problem of
papal infallibility, and examining in their own writings
this question on which the future of the Church depends.
It has been perceived now that it was an unfortunate
notion to put forward only grounds of expediency,
discretion, and regard for public opinion; for no answer
was left when Spanish, South American, Irish, Neapolitan
and Sicilian Bishops said that no such public
opinion existed with them, that some were apathetic
and others had long held the doctrine, which would
create not the slightest difficulty or inconvenience with
them, and that they were the majority.
</p>

<p>
It was high time therefore to take firmer ground, and
now this has been done by Cardinals Schwarzenberg
and Rauscher and Bishop Hefele, three of the most influential
<pb n='450'/><anchor id='Pg450'/>
prelates of the Church, or rather by four, for
Bishop Ketteler too has either composed or got some one
to compose a work on papal infallibility.<note place='foot'>This proved to be a mistake.</note> But the whole
edition had the ill luck to be seized in the Roman Post-office,
so that not a single Bishop got a copy. The
authorities seem to know that the work opposes the
dogma, on which all the thoughts and plans of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
now hinge, although Ketteler not long ago showed himself
an adherent of the doctrine, and only assailed the
opportuneness of defining it.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>, as the official organ of the Court, now
announces the principle on which the Papal Government
acts. One must distinguish, it says, between the
Custom-house and Post-office. The Custom-house gives
the Bishops the missives and packets addressed to them
unopened, for it assumes that they will only have
proper books sent them. It is different with the Post-office,
which is bound not to favour the dissemination
of error.<note place='foot'><q>Elle estime justement qu'elle a le devoir de ne pas favoriser la diffusion
de l'erreur ou des attaques contre l'autorité des Vicaires de Jésus-Christ.</q></note> So the conscientiousness of the officials of
the Roman Post-office is a model for the rest of the
world, and it is understood that the habitual opening
of letters, so far from being immoral, is an expression of
<pb n='451'/><anchor id='Pg451'/>
the purest and most delicate morality; for might not a
letter contain some error or attack on the rights of the
Vicar of Christ? And how could the officials answer to
God and His earthly representative for even unconsciously
co-operating in the spread of such error?
</p>

<p>
As I have not seen Ketteler's publication, I can only
quote the judgment of a friend who has read it and
thinks it will do good service. The other three works
are before me. They must all have been printed at
Naples, for the Roman police has to look after the consciences
not only of the Post-office secretaries and letter-carriers,
but of the compositors, printers, bookbinders
and booksellers. It cannot allow that any breath of
error should sully the pure mirror of their souls, even
though concealed under the veil of the Latin tongue;
and the corroding poison becomes worse when prepared,
as in this case, by Bishops and Cardinals.<note place='foot'>The infallibilists are of course luckier. Their writings are readily
printed and circulated. At the same time with the writings mentioned
above, Archbishop Spalding has published a letter to Dupanloup, emphatically
denying that he had spoken against the opportuneness of the dogma
in the paper he drew up with several other American Bishops, and declaring
himself a zealous advocate for it.</note>
</p>

<p>
I will speak first of Cardinal Rauscher's work, which
is the most comprehensive of the three, and touches on
many questions passed over in the other two. Written
<pb n='452'/><anchor id='Pg452'/>
in a calm and dignified tone, it carefully avoids every
word or phrase which could offend the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and goes
to the utmost length in making concessions possible for
any one to accept without becoming an infallibilist;
but it will nevertheless pour much oil on the flame of
anger which has been blazing for weeks past, and singes
now one Bishop and now another. Papal infallibility,
says the Archbishop of Vienna, must extend to everything
ever decided by any Pope, and the whole Christian
world must hold with Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> and his Bull
<hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi> that the Popes have received power
from Christ over the whole domain of the State. That
will be welcome news to those who want to exclude
the Church altogether from civil society. That the
Popes themselves in the ancient Church did not hold
themselves infallible, that the whole history and conduct
of the ancient Church in doctrinal controversies
would be an inexplicable riddle on the infallibilist
hypothesis, and moreover that the Popes have often
fallen into open errors rejected by the Church&mdash;all this
is well established, though the author cites only some
particular facts from the abundant sources he has to
draw upon. He then shows the sharp antithesis between
the ancient doctrine of the Church and the Popes
<pb n='453'/><anchor id='Pg453'/>
on the relations of Church and State and the enunciations
of Popes since Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> and Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>
With papal infallibility the whole mediæval theory of
the unlimited power of Popes to depose kings, absolve
from oaths of allegiance, abrogate laws, and interfere
in all civil affairs at their will, must be declared to be
an immutable doctrine with which the Church stands
or falls. The Christian Emperors would have treated
such a doctrine as high treason, and even in the days of
Charles the Great it would have excited universal
astonishment. If this doctrine really had to be preached
now to the Christian people, it would be a triumph for
the enemies of religion, for the best men would soon be
convinced of the utter impossibility of paying any
regard to the precepts of the Christian religion in civil
matters. The Cardinal proceeds to dwell on the forgeries
by which the great master of scholastic theology,
the favourite and oracle of all Jesuits and ultramontanes,
Thomas Aquinas, was led to adopt the doctrine
of infallibility, and how again his influence shaped the
whole scholastic system and drew the great Religious
Orders, who were bound by oath to maintain his teaching,
to adopt it. He concludes in these weighty
words:&mdash;<q>If the Pope is declared to be, alone and
<pb n='454'/><anchor id='Pg454'/>
without the Episcopate, infallible in faith and morals,
the Œcumenical Councils are robbed of the authority
recognised by Gregory the Great, when he said he
honoured them equally with the four Gospels; for they
would be and would always have been, even at the
time of the Nicene Council, superfluous for deciding on
faith and morals. This doctrine would be a declaration
of war against the innermost convictions of the Church,
and she would be robbed for the future of those aids
supplied by the Council of Trent at her extremest need;
even the See of Rome would lose the support the
Bishops then assembled gave to it, for after the close
of that Council, the power of the Popes became greater
than it was before.</q>
</p>

<p>
The remark of Cardinal Rauscher that, when the
dogma of papal infallibility is defined the Church will
be deprived of one of her most effective institutions,
viz., General Councils, has made a great impression here,
as far as I can see. It is readily understood that an
assemblage of men, educated to believe in the infallibility
of one master, and to repeat mechanically without
examination whatever he tells them, would have no
influence among men and would be universally regarded
as superfluous, a mere idle pageant rather than any
<pb n='455'/><anchor id='Pg455'/>
real support to the Church. The Church would be impoverished
by the loss of one member of its organism,
and that very member would be paralysed which in
moments of distress and danger had most effectually
protected her.
</p>

<p>
Bishop Hefele's work is worthy of the man who is
beyond question the most profound historical scholar
among the members of the Council. One can only
regret that a writer so pre-eminently qualified to pronounce
a clear and weighty opinion on the whole controversy
in all its bearings should have confined himself
to the single question of the condemnation of Pope
Honorius. Those who wish to know the history of Honorius
and the Sixth Council in 681, and to see a flagrant
example of the utterly crude and unscientific poverty of
that modern scholasticism which is treated as theology
in the Jesuit lecture-rooms, may be recommended a brief
study of this question, which has already produced so
many writings and hypotheses, simple and easily understood
as it is in itself. A General Council, acknowledged
by the whole Church in East and West, condemned
a Pope for heresy after his death, and anathematized
him on account of a dogmatic letter he issued. The
sentence was without contradiction accepted throughout
<pb n='456'/><anchor id='Pg456'/>
the whole Church, the Roman Church included,
and even introduced into the profession of faith to
which every new Pope had to swear at his election.
It was repeatedly confirmed by subsequent Councils,
and in short remained in full force for centuries, till
the Popes were seized with a desire to become infallible.
It is only since the fifteenth and sixteenth century,
and especially since the Jesuits&mdash;beginning with
Bellarmine&mdash;undertook to revise history according to
the requirements of their new dogmatic system, that
this extremely contradictory fact had to be submitted
to a process of manipulation, and the rock on which all
schemes of papal infallibility seemed to be wrecked had
to be got out of the way. <q>Si plus minusve secuerit
sine fraude esto,</q> was said in the old Roman law which
allowed a creditor to cut a pound of flesh from the body
of his debtor, and so do the knives of the Jesuits and
curialists cut right into the flesh of history. The Acts
of the Sixth Council were said to have been corrupted
through the perfidy of the Greeks, and the whole history
and even the letters of Honorius to be forgeries. The
Popes themselves, Rome, and the whole West had let
themselves be fooled by the cunning Greeks into condemning
<pb n='457'/><anchor id='Pg457'/>
an innocent and orthodox Pope as a heretic,
and the letters of Pope Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> must also be forgeries.
In short these reasoners were caught in the meshes of
their own net, and when in 1660 Lucas Holstein got the
Roman <hi rend='italic'>Liber Diurnus</hi> printed&mdash;an excellent edition of
which Rozière lately brought out in Paris&mdash;the whole
impression was suppressed, for it contained the old form
of oath which expressly attested the condemnation of
Honorius. But twenty years later the book appeared
to the great chagrin of Rome, and the infallibilist
school had to change their front. They now turned to
the letters of Honorius and tried to show that they
were perfectly orthodox. But that did not touch the
fact that a General Council had solemnly condemned
a Pope for heresy, and that the whole Church&mdash;the
Popes and the Roman Church included&mdash;had accepted
the sentence without demur. Hefele has shortly and
pointedly exposed the shifts and dishonesties of this
long controversy carried on in more than a hundred
polemical works; and he has taken care, at the same
time, to establish conclusively the wide-reaching facts
and general results of the inquiry. He shows (page
11), how up to the eleventh century every Pope swore
<pb n='458'/><anchor id='Pg458'/>
to the truth that an Œcumenical Council had condemned
a Pope for heresy.<note place='foot'>[English readers may be referred to Renouf's <hi rend='italic'>Case of Honorius Reconsidered</hi>.
Longmans, 1869.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Schwarzenberg's work is chiefly directed
against Archbishop Manning.<note place='foot'>It is now understood to have been written by Dr. S. Mayer under his
direction.</note> Hitherto the infallibilists,
to avoid pushing their theory into sheer absurdity,
had appended the condition of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign>, which
everybody could interpret more or less stringently
according to his own view, and theologians had actually
given twenty-five different explanations of what was
required for an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign> decision. In order to
get out of this labyrinth, Manning has propounded
a simpler theory. Everything according to him depends
on the Pope's intention; whenever he <q>intends
to require the assent of the whole Church,</q> he is
infallible.<note place='foot'>[See <hi rend='italic'>Pastoral on Infallibility of Roman Pontiff</hi>. Longmans, 1869.]</note> Schwarzenberg points out with pungent
irony to what monstrous consequences this would lead.
He recalls the saying of Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> that the Pope
holds all rights locked up in his breast. And thus it
must be assumed on Manning's theory that the Pope
holds in his own mind all doctrines present and future,
<pb n='459'/><anchor id='Pg459'/>
and draws from this internal treasure-house under
divine inspiration what he wishes to reveal to the
world, so that infallibility becomes inspiration. Has
it occurred to the Cardinal that this is precisely the
personal opinion of the very man who has now, for
the sake of his own infallibility, resolved to plunge
the Church into an internal conflict, of which no one
can see the end?
</p>

<p>
It is then further pointed out that, if the new dogma
with its consequences prevails, all Governments will
put themselves in an attitude of self-defence against
the Church. Bishops as well as Councils cease to be
any necessary part of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>magisterium</foreign> of the Church,
and there is no longer any need for the distinct
assent of the Episcopate; the only office left them
is to praise and accept with thanks every decision of
the Pope's. Perhaps they may still be allowed to give
their advice before he decides, but they have nothing
to say to the decision itself or after it, but only to obey
and promulgate the papal revelations.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='460'/><anchor id='Pg460'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Thirty-Ninth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 23, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The four chapters of the
<hi rend='italic'>Constitutio Dogmatica de Fide</hi> bear in their ultimate
shape such evident marks of the influence of the
minority, and so many concessions were made in them,
that there is a danger of overlooking the greatness of
their defeat and their change of mind, should they
finally accept the supplemental paragraph mentioned
in my last letter but one. Although it was determined
that the minority should make no general opposition
to this paragraph, there were not a few Bishops
who saw clearly enough its importance and danger.
They consoled themselves at first with the promise that
the suspicious passage, which clothed the Roman Congregations
and the mischief they work in the Church
with conciliar sanction, would not be voted upon till
the still incomplete portion of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>
came on for final settlement. And when, in spite of
<pb n='461'/><anchor id='Pg461'/>
this promise, it was announced to be the general wish
of the Commission that the voting should take place at
once, the opponents were quieted by a written assurance
that no new power was thereby to be given to the
Roman Congregations, and nothing to be altered about
them, but all to remain as of old. Gasser, Bishop of
Brixen, had the courage to say, in the name of the
Deputation, that the passage did not refer to heresy,
though it expressly binds the Bishops to the observance
of the constitutions and decrees of the Holy See,
not only in regard to heresy (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>hæretica pravitas</foreign>), but also
theological errors and controversies. It is incredible
that any one could be deceived by such a ruse as this,
and yet it is a fact that not even forty Bishops made
the omission of this paragraph a condition of their
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>. As the Opposition seemed thereby to be shrunk
to less than five per cent. of the Council, the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
was persuaded that it could get rid of them altogether
by acting with spirit.
</p>

<p>
On April 18 appeared an admonition with the following
passage: <q>It must be remembered that according
to the Apostolic Brief, <hi rend='italic'>Multiplices inter</hi> (of Nov. 27,
1869), prescribing the method of procedure in public Sessions,
no other vote can be given in them than a simple
<pb n='462'/><anchor id='Pg462'/>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'><q>Animadvertendum quippe est, quod in publicâ Sessione juxta Litteras
Apostolicas <hi rend='italic'>Multiplices inter</hi> d. d. Novembris 1869 Num. <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>, quo modus
procedendi in Sessionibus publicis præscribitur, non liceat aliter suffragium
dare, nisi pure et simpliciter per verba: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> aut <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, excluso
alio quovis modo.</q></note> The Fathers who had given
conditional votes in Congregation had to choose now
whether they would accept the chapter unconditionally
or reject it <q>sans phrase.</q> It was foreseen that this
alternative would disclose the weakness of the Opposition,
and that those of its number who shrank from a
decisive rejection would be won for the majority, for
the real test of an Opposition is not in words but acts.
Protests which are not answered, and speeches which
are not heard, may be patiently borne with, as long as
all goes well in the public voting. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
reckons that the minority will not now dare to show
itself, and thus the unanimity will not be disturbed:
and its consequent resolve might decide the whole
course and upshot of the Council. If the minority
gives in here, it will have suffered a first defeat, and
must reconstitute itself on a new basis, by taking part
in decrees carried under anathema, which are against
its own convictions, it breaks with its past, accepts the
responsibility and solidarity of the Council and complicity
<pb n='463'/><anchor id='Pg463'/>
with the majority. This is to admit that all
the petitions and protests it was thought necessary to
present in the interests of the freedom of the Council were
superfluous and aimless, and all the warnings offered of
the threatened danger of its œcumenicity being questioned,
etc., unmeaning. For the Council to publish
anathemas implies the conviction that it is free, legitimate,
and œcumenical, and that the order of business
is acceptable. The minority thereby would themselves
testify to everything they have hitherto assailed, and the
only thing left for them would be to insist on their
rights as guarded by the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>consensus unanimis</foreign>. All other
grounds for calling the Council in question would be
abandoned, and it might fairly be doubted whether the
Opposition would adhere to that after giving up so
much; at the same time it is morally certain that
the Court and the majority do not acknowledge that
right.
</p>

<p>
During the General Congregation of the 19th, four
Bishops, Latour d'Auvergne, Dreux-Brézé, La Bouillerie,
and Mermillod, went to the Pope and requested
him to have the decree on infallibility brought forward
directly after the Solemn Session of the 24th. They
thought rightly enough the favourable moment had
<pb n='464'/><anchor id='Pg464'/>
come and all was now ready. Pius received the
Bishops, who came as deputies of the 400, with great
distinction, and replied that he would discuss the matter
with the Presidents.
</p>

<p>
As it is impossible to see how the Bishops or the
Governments could get rid of the <foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign> when
once it is fairly established, the Opposition Bishops
know that they will have to approach the great question
in the position they take for themselves to-morrow in
the first solemn voting, and with such power, unanimity,
and influence as they thereby establish their claim to.
It is still open to them up to to-night to use the present
moment for a complete victory. They only need declare
that their protests and warnings were not idle words but
seriously meant, that the incongruities which endanger
the freedom of the Council and suggest doubts of its
legitimacy must be got rid of before any decrees are
published under threat of everlasting damnation, and
that until they are listened to on this point they refuse
to take part in any solemn voting.
</p>

<p>
But, as far as I know of the Opposition, the majority
of them have no ear or heart for such counsel; their
grand object is to avoid any decisive conflict, and so
to-morrow they will simply yield,&mdash;to consider quietly
<pb n='465'/><anchor id='Pg465'/>
afterwards their future plan of campaign! Some have
thought they might save their honour and conscience
by a written explanation of their vote. In the public
international meeting of the Opposition these plans
were rejected, but two rough drafts of the kind were
proposed the day before yesterday, one by the Germans,
one by the French. Both are too strong and dignified
to find many supporters, and too weak to justify the
Opposition in the eyes of the Christian world.
</p>

<p>
It is the sacred duty of the Bishops in Council to
bear witness to the ancient doctrine of the Church,
and to reform it when it has been obscured by abuses
in practice and in the rule of the hierarchy. The
more abuses there are, so much the more difficult, and
so much the more indispensable also is this reform.
What the Catholic world expects of the Council is not a
fresh sanction, still less an increase, of these abuses, but
the deliverance and purification of the Church from
them. But to accept the paragraph which recommends
obedience to the constitutions and decrees of Roman
Congregations is to make the fulfilment of this serious
duty, on which the fate of the Church hinges, impossible.
For that paragraph will confirm and clothe
with new authority decrees which are a disgrace to the
<pb n='466'/><anchor id='Pg466'/>
Church and an injury to civilisation, wherein the
confused morality of dark centuries is taught and
Christian morality denied; and that too without any
examination or discussion, any limitation or exception.
The Bishops will thereby degrade themselves to servants
of the Roman <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>prelatura</foreign>, and sink into accomplices
of the Inquisition. We are told indeed that the paragraph
will not touch dogma, but for ethics and practice
it is almost more important than infallibility itself. It
gives full play beforehand for arbitrary caprice and
paves the way for the infallibilist dogma.
</p>

<p>
If we look into the future, the questions come before
us of unanimity in matters of faith, and of the confirmation
and acceptance of the Council throughout the
Church. As to the latter, the Bishops will make it far
harder for the Governments to stand by them if to-morrow
they virtually repudiate their own protests. The
question of unanimity remains as weighty as before, and
the gross errors of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> in its attack on Strossmayer's
vindication of the principle of moral unanimity
in decisions on faith has greatly lightened the task of
two learned Bishops, who undertook to put in a clear
light the true doctrine of the Church on the subject.
</p>

<p>
If the voting of to-morrow goes altogether in the sense
<pb n='467'/><anchor id='Pg467'/>
of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, the inference will be that all the positions
of the minority can be turned, and that as they are resolved
to avoid any collision, they may be brought by
skilful manipulation not to trouble the moral unanimity
any further. Many of them console themselves with
the thought that they are only sacrificing everything to
peace and harmony, and are not responsible for the
undertaking they have been deluded into.
</p>

<p>
The propositions of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> give
abundant room for manœuvring. There are many
opportunities for apparent concessions and for dividing
and perplexing the Opposition, and finally driving them
into a corner, so that in mutual distrust of one
another they may abandon all hope of making any
successful resistance, and satisfy themselves that as
nearly everything has been given up already it is not
worth while to risk a catastrophe by taking any further
step.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='468'/><anchor id='Pg468'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fortieth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 24, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The final votes of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> or
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign> on the four chapters of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>
are to be taken in to-day's public Session. And thus
after four months and a half a theological decree, or
rather a batch of decrees and doctrinal decisions, will be
brought to a successful issue, and the first ripe fruit
plucked from the hitherto barren tree of the Council,
so that there will be something in black and white to
carry home. As these four chapters have been subjected
to the pruning and toning down of the Opposition,
they bear little resemblance to the original draft
of the Jesuits, and the minority may lay claim to a
victory which four months ago could scarcely have been
hoped for. What has been gained for the future by
these theological commonplaces and self-evident propositions
is of course another question. The general
view of the Bishops appears to be that there is no real
<pb n='469'/><anchor id='Pg469'/>
gain for the Church in these propositions, which can
only excite the wonder of believing Christians that it
should be thought necessary to prohibit at this time
of day such fundamental errors. The value of their
labours they take to lie, not in what they have said,
but in what they have with so much trouble expunged
from the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Several Bishops attach great weight to the consent
of the Deputation to substitute for <q>Romana Ecclesia</q>
the words <q>Ecclesia Catholica et Apostolica Romana.</q>
Others think it a matter of indifference. Hefele's
pamphlet on Honorius has created such a sensation
that the Pope has commissioned the Jesuit Liberatore
and Delegati, Professor at the Sapienza, to white-wash
Honorius, and make away with everything in his
history incompatible with the new dogma. Pius is
persuaded, and his infallible <q>feeling</q> tells him, that
everything must have happened quite differently from
what is represented; how, he knows not, but he thinks
that the Jesuit and the Roman professor have only to
make the proper investigations and they will soon discover
the requisite materials for refuting the German
Bishop.
</p>

<p>
On Wednesday, April 20, Rome was illuminated to
<pb n='470'/><anchor id='Pg470'/>
celebrate the Pope's return from Gaëta. The Roman
officials greatly dislike these illuminations on financial
grounds, for they have to contribute to the cost out of
their own pockets. A triumphal arch was erected for
the Pope at the end of the narrow street leading to St.
Peter's piazza, and the following inscription in letters
of fire was conspicuous far and wide:&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Popoli chinatevi innanzi al Vaticano,</l>
<l>Ecco il Pontefice ch'io vi conservai nei giorni di pericolo,</l>
<l>Esso è la pietra angolare della mia chiesa,</l>
<l>Il refugio degli oppressi,</l>
<l>Il sostegno del povero,</l>
<l>Lo scudo della civiltà e della fede.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
That is the witness Pius bears to himself. To theologians
it may be a new idea that he personally is the
corner-stone of the Church, but that is only one of the
many predicates and prerogatives which may be deduced
from infallibility. Two isolated voices cried <q>Evviva
il Papa infallibile.</q> It was clear the multitude was to
be stimulated to swell the cry, but, as before, all remained
quiet. The attempt has been sometimes made
before, whether by amateurs or under official inspiration
I know not, and then Veuillot asserts in the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>
that he has heard this shout of vast multitudes breaking
forth spontaneously from the exuberance of their
<pb n='471'/><anchor id='Pg471'/>
hearts. It is like the music of the spheres which only
Pythagoras heard.
</p>

<p>
Ketteler's pamphlet was finally published on April
18, and the Bishop has begun to distribute it. It is
really directed against the dogma itself, which for a
long time people could not believe, and not merely
against the opportuneness of defining it. How much
better would it have been for the interests of the
Church, if the necessity had been recognised long ago
for looking this Medusa's head straight in the face, and
defying its petrifying gaze, and if our Bishops had
plainly and decisively announced their resolution last
December to have no dealings with it. Now at least
Cardinal Rauscher does not spare warnings; he perceives
the gravity of the danger and has had a new
fly-leaf distributed, showing that the promulgation of
papal infallibility will elevate the two Bulls <hi rend='italic'>Unam
Sanctam</hi> (of Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>) and <hi rend='italic'>Cum ex Apostolatûs
officio</hi> (of Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>) into rules of faith for the whole
Catholic world, and thus it will be taught universally
in Europe and America, henceforth, that the Pope is
absolute master in temporal affairs also, that he can
order war or peace, and that every monarch or bishop
who does not submit to him or helps any one separated
<pb n='472'/><anchor id='Pg472'/>
from him ought to be deprived of his throne if not of his
life, besides the other wonderful doctrines in the second
of these Bulls, which must reduce every theologian to
despair.<note place='foot'>[Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Janus</hi>, pp. 382-4.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> All that is nothing to the majority, for
whom the law of logical contradiction has no existence.
It is their watchword that the dogma conquers logic
as well as history. One of their German members gladly
re-echoes the idea that the proper aim and office of the
Council is to stop the mouth of arrogant professors;
if that is accomplished everything is gained, according
to this pastor of a flock feeding on red earth. On the
other hand I heard very different words fall to-day
from the mouth of another German Bishop, who said
he was constantly asking himself how long the German
Bishops would look on and put up with everything.
</p>

<p>
The great and all-absorbing question now is what will
next be brought before the Council after April 24. In
the natural order the second part of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>
would come on, which is comparatively innocuous
though abundantly capable of improvement. But is
it not time to fabricate the talisman of absolute power,
the infallibilist dogma? Then would the Council be
in the fullest sense and for ever provided for and
<pb n='473'/><anchor id='Pg473'/>
finished, and the master would praise his servants.
Many will answer the question in the affirmative.
The two modern Fathers, Veuillot and Margotti, strain
every nerve daily for that end, and many of the most
zealous French Bishops&mdash;as those of Moulins, Bourges,
and Carcassonne, and the indefatigable Mermillod&mdash;have
represented to the willing Pius, as I mentioned
yesterday, that now is the nick of time, and that he
may gratify the longing of his faithful adherents by
placing infallibility in the order of the day. These
Frenchmen consider that their Government, now occupied
with the plébiscite, will not trouble itself with the
acts and decisions of the Council, and moreover needs
the help of the clergy. Amid the bustle of the plébiscite,
they think the new dogma, and even the reproduction
of the Syllabus in the twenty-one canons, will
excite little stir or indignation, for the French can
only embrace one idea at a time, and the Parisians only
discuss one subject in their <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>salons</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Banneville has at last actually presented the memorandum
of his Government to the Pope, as President of
the Council, and with the intimation that it should be
communicated to the Fathers. That of course will not
be done, for both Pius and Antonelli are irritated
<pb n='474'/><anchor id='Pg474'/>
at the paper. Pius is annoyed at the innermost kernel
of the dogma being so openly exposed to view, when
Count Daru says, <q>You want to hand over all rights
and powers to the Church, and then by the infallibilist
dogma to concentrate this plenitude of temporal and
spiritual power in the one person of the Pope.</q> That
is of course what the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> does want, but it should be
uttered in pious and somewhat obscure phraseology,
as the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> usually speaks, and not be called by its
right name in this bold and naked fashion. Antonelli
again is much displeased, because his favourite distinction
between the principles in which the Church
must be inexorable, and the practice in which Rome
will graciously concede the very opposite, is met here
by the inquiry whether the faithful are actually to be
taught henceforth that they must believe what they
need not carry out in practice, and accept as divinely
revealed rules which they may without hesitation
transgress? He had reckoned on a better understanding,
on the part of the French Government, of the
favourite Roman theory of infinite and inexhaustible
papal indults and dispensations, and is glad that he need
make no reply to the note which throws so glaring a
light on the morality of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and its notions of
<pb n='475'/><anchor id='Pg475'/>
duty and truth. He contents himself with telling the
diplomatists that there would be some difficulty in the
Pope's communicating the note to the Council. Clearly,
for they must at the same time be directed to attempt
a refutation, and that would lead to very awkward consequences.
The French Government might indeed
have sent their memorandum to each Bishop separately,
but then they would have had the prospect of the non-French
Bishops of the majority returning it unopened.
</p>

<p>
Count Trautmansdorff has also presented the memorandum
of the Austrian Government to the Cardinal
Secretary of State. It runs as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Nous voulons seulement élever aussi notre voix
pour dégager notre responsabilité et signaler les conséquences
presqu'inévitables d'actes qui devraient être
regardés comme une atteinte portée aux lois qui nous
régissent. Comme le Gouvernement français, c'est
à un devoir de conscience que nous pensons obéier,
en avertissant la cour de Rome des périls de la voie
dans laquelle des influences prepondérates semblent
vouloir pousser le Concile. Ce qui nous émeut, ce
n'est pas le danger dont nos institutions sont menacées,
mais bien celui que courent la paix des esprits et le
maintien de la bonne harmonie dans les relations de
<pb n='476'/><anchor id='Pg476'/>
l'état avec l'Église. Le sentiment qui nous fait agir
doit paraître d'autant moins suspect au St. Siége qu'il
correspond à l'attitude d'une fraction importante des
Pères du Concile, dont le dévouement aux intérêts du
Catholicisme ne saurait être l'objet d'un doute. Placés
sur un tout autre terrain que cette fraction, puisque
nous n'obéissons qu'à des considérations politiques,
nous nous rencontrons toutefois aujourd'hui dans le
désir commun d'écarter certaines éventualités. Cette
coïncidence de nos efforts nous permet de croire qu'en
prenant la parole au nom des seuls intérêts de l'État
nous ne méconnaissons pas ceux de l'Église. Si la
démarche du Gouvernement français, que nous désirons
seconder de tout notre pouvoir, vient en ce
moment donner un appui à la minorité du Concile
et l'aider à faire prévaloir des idées de modération ou
de prudence, nous ne pourrons que nous féliciter d'un
tel résultat, bien que, je le répète, notre action soit
parfaitement indépendante et doive rester en tout cas
indépendante de celle des membres du Concile.</q>
</p>

<p>
Finally the observations of the French Government
are urgently commended to the attention of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='477'/><anchor id='Pg477'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-First Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 27, 1870.</hi>&mdash;We find ourselves in a
remarkably critical position here. The great event
so long expected of the first promulgation of dogmas
is over, and the desired unanimity has been successfully
attained for these four chapters of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema
de Fide</hi>, notwithstanding the supplemental paragraph.
Two Bishops who could not overcome their dislike to
that paragraph preferred to stay away or leave Rome
for the day. All the curialists are in high feather,
and are congratulating each other on their victory,
boasting that they have gained three most important
points without any public opposition. First, the Pope,
for the first time for 350 years,<note place='foot'>[Since, that is, the Lateran synod of 1517 under Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> and in contradiction
to the practice of the first 1000 years of Church history,
has defined and published the decrees in his own
name as supreme legislator, just like those masters of
<pb n='478'/><anchor id='Pg478'/>
the world, Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> and Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>, merely
with the addition that the Council also sanctions them.
Secondly, the new order of business has now been
virtually accepted by all, and the protest abandoned.
Thirdly, the conclusion, which is meant to invest with
conciliar authority the former dogmatic decrees of the
Popes, has been accepted.
</p>

<p>
The excitement visible on the countenances of the
majority, when Schwarzenberg, Darboy, Rauscher and
Hefele were called up to vote, showed what had been
expected. The mass of the majority say the same
thing will happen when the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on the Church has
to be voted on; the minority answer that it will not,
and that they only want to avoid wasting their powder
before the time; <q>la minorité se recueille,</q> like Russia
after the last war, and on the division day will be
found fully equipped for the fight. We shall soon see,
for that day is not far distant. But now what next?
The infallibilist party are afraid of this dogma being
lost after all, like a ship wrecked in port. They reckon
that the time is approaching when the Council must
inevitably be prorogued, and therefore urge the Pope
to break through the regular order of the <hi rend='italic'>Schemata</hi>, and
bring forward at once either the whole <hi rend='italic'>Schema de
<pb n='479'/><anchor id='Pg479'/>
Ecclesiâ</hi> or the article on papal infallibility which has
been interpolated into it. The four French Bishops
assured him that they spoke in the name of the 400.
Pius would not of course feel any very constraining
influence in their wishes <foreign rend='italic'>per se</foreign>, for he knows well
enough that the 400 are composed mainly of his foster-sons
and of the Bishops of the States of the Church
and the Neapolitans, who all speak or hold their peace
and sit or stand as they are bidden. But it would be an
unspeakably bitter sacrifice for him to refuse to his
trusty adherents what he so earnestly desires himself,
and to let these 400 or at least many of them say, <q>Your
own organ, the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, the Jesuits, Veuillot, Margotti&mdash;have
forced this question upon us; we have agitated
for it and staked our name and theological credit on it,
and now it is all to be labour lost!</q>
</p>

<p>
But now the writings of the German Bishops have
appeared and the notes of the Governments have been
delivered. To the French note is added a more urgent
one from Austria, as well as a Prussian, a Portuguese and
now also a Bavarian note, and all breathe the same spirit.
All give warning that they shall regard the threatened
decrees on the power and infallibility of the Pope as a
declaration of war against the order and authority of
<pb n='480'/><anchor id='Pg480'/>
the State. Even the English Government leaves no
room for doubt about its mind, and if the Pope&mdash;as I
know&mdash;fears above all things any manifestation of
feeling there, he might learn from Manning that the
strongest antipathy is felt among all classes, high and
low, to the proposed dogmas, and that English statesmen
see in them nothing less than a suicidal infatuation.
Manning has thoroughly authentic proofs of
that in his hands, but of course he won't produce
them.
</p>

<p>
Pius is in a chronic state of extreme irritation. He
sees with pleasure his two favourite journals&mdash;the
<hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Unita</hi>&mdash;abuse the Opposition Bishops in
the most contemptuous language, and he indulges
himself in outbreaks of bitterness against those who
question his infallibility, which pass from mouth to
mouth here but which one dares not write down.
Even Cardinal Bilio is alarmed at such ebullitions, and
affirms that he is constantly urging moderation and
forbearance on the Pope, and has already warded off a
great deal of mischief.
</p>

<p>
What strikes us foreigners is the evident indifference
to the Council and its acts manifested by the
inhabitants of the eternal city of every class. It is
<pb n='481'/><anchor id='Pg481'/>
seldom spoken of in society, and what absorbs the
attention of the world north of the Alps seems hardly
to have the least interest for the Romans, what is there
heard of with astonishment they hardly think worth a
passing mention. And if ever the Council is spoken of,
it is in hurried, mysterious, abrupt sentences, for every
one says the espionage system has never been in such
force here as since the opening of the Council, and a
large staff lives by the trade. I know persons here
whose doors are constantly watched by spies, who do
not even conceal themselves, and if the Roman theologians
had such rich materials for their investigations
as is possessed by the Roman police, they would not
have their equals in the world.
</p>

<p>
The Romans as a rule are fully aware of the financial
value of the infallibilist doctrine, and know right well
that a large increase of revenue as well as power from
all countries is looked for as its product. That in
their eyes is already an accomplished fact. They
know for certain that the dogma will be at once proclaimed,
and there is hardly a Roman here who has
not an uncle or brother or nephew in orders and may
not hope to share the anticipated profits in his own
person or in the person of his relatives. The curialists
<pb n='482'/><anchor id='Pg482'/>
here say, <q>We have lost so much by the diminution of
the States of the Church, and so many payments, benefices
and lucrative posts have passed out of our hands,
that we absolutely require to be indemnified in some
other way, and this the new dogma is intended to do
and must do for us.</q> If ever the Pope is acknowledged
throughout Christendom as an infallible authority, it is
inevitable that ecclesiastical centralization should take
much larger dimensions than before. Not only doctrine,
but everything concerning Church life will be
drawn to Rome and there finally settled. Theologians
may undertake to distinguish between matters to which
the Pope's infallible authority extends or does not
extend, but in practice everything signed with his
name will be held to be an utterance of divine truth,
and nothing which is not attested with that signature
will be held valid. There is a proverb here&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Quei consigli son prezzati</l>
<l>Che son chiesti e ben pagati.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And who would not gladly pay a handsome sum to be
armed with an infallible decision, which will at once
crush all opposition and put down all adversaries?
The golden age of papal chanceries and clerks lies
not in the past, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
<pb n='483'/><anchor id='Pg483'/>
when, as a court prelate of the day tells us,
the papal officials were daily employed in counting up
gold pieces; it will first dawn on the day this truly
golden doctrine of infallibility is promulgated. Were
Cicero to re-appear in Rome now, he might repeat
what he said in the Oration <hi rend='italic'>Pro Sextio</hi>, <q>Jucunda res
plebi Romanæ, victus enim suppeditabatur large sine
labore;</q> only he could no longer add, <q>Repugnabant
boni, quod ab industriâ plebem ad desidiam avocari
putabant.</q> For such <q>boni</q> no longer exist at
Rome; rather is the account of Tacitus completely
verified, <q>Securi omnes aliena subsidia expectant,
sibi ignavi, aliis graves.</q><note place='foot'>Tac. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi></note> Another thing is the large
and incurable deficit in the Roman finances, which
must increase every year. There is an annual expenditure
of thirty million francs to cover, and the
Peter's pence, which came to fourteen millions in 1861,
have sunk to about eleven millions, notwithstanding the
collections ordered to be made everywhere twice a
year. No further help can be obtained from loans.
M. de Corcelles, who has exposed this uncomfortable
state of things with the best intentions, has no other
remedy to propose but a great increase of Peter's pence.
<pb n='484'/><anchor id='Pg484'/>
It is hoped in Rome that the different nations will contribute
larger sums than before to the Pope, now he is
become infallible and thus more closely united to Deity.
But they reckon much more on the enormous centralization
and all-embracing monopoly of all possible dispensations,
indulgences, consultations, canonizations, and
decisions on moral, liturgical, political, dogmatic and
disciplinary questions. They remember the treasures
amassed in the temple of Delphi in ancient days, and
expect the new oracle to be erected on the Tiber to
attract, like a vast magnet, not iron but gold and
silver.
</p>

<p>
Neither Pius nor the Monsignori and other curialists
think it conceivable that the minority will hold out
to the last in their opposition. They reckon securely
on this fraction of the Council being broken up by
fear and discouragement, and that few if any of them
will let matters come to a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non placet</foreign> in the next public
Session, and thus openly confess themselves unwillingly
subdued. To those Roman clerics, who are
accustomed to look at religious questions only as
the ladder by which to mount to an agreeable life and
good income, courage and steadfastness in the confession
of ascertained truth is something strange and
<pb n='485'/><anchor id='Pg485'/>
inconceivable. Fear and hope, calculations of loss
and gain, will finally decide the Bishops' votes&mdash;that
is the firm persuasion of every Italian member of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. So much is certain: if on the very eve of the
Solemn Session, when the new dogma is to be promulgated,
it was certainly known that eighty Bishops
would say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign> next day, the Session would be
countermanded and the Church saved. The first question
for us Germans is of course whether we can trust
our Bishops? Will they abide steadfast? Or will they
at last sacrifice themselves and the truth, their clergy
and their flocks? As to what immediately concerns
the clergy, this is not strictly a question of doctrine
belonging to the sphere of religious faith and mystery,
where one might make a willing submission of mind to
a decree held to be the voice of divine revelation; it is
a pure question of historical facts to be determined by
historical evidence, of points on which every educated
man capable of judging evidence, whether a Catholic or
not, can form an independent judgment. Every one
with eyes to see can answer with absolute certainty
these three questions, on which the whole matter
hinges&mdash;
</p>

<p>
1. Is it true that the admonition to Peter to confirm
<pb n='486'/><anchor id='Pg486'/>
his brethren has always and in the whole Church been
understood of an infallibility promised to all Bishops
of Rome?
</p>

<p>
2. Is it true that this infallibility of all Popes has
been taught and witnessed to in the whole Church
through all ages down to our own day?
</p>

<p>
3. Is it true that no Pope has ever taught a doctrine
rejected by the Church, and that no Pope has ever
been condemned by the Church for his doctrine?
</p>

<p>
It is absolutely impossible for any one, who feels
compelled by his own investigation of history to answer
these three questions in the negative, to submit
inwardly to the opposite decision of the Council, whatever
external homage he may pay to it. Ten Councils
will not be able to shake him for a moment in his conviction;
he will only say, <q>pur si muove.</q> His doubts
will be turned, not against what is historically certain but
against the Council; he will call in question the real freedom,
the intrinsic claims and authority of this Council,
and&mdash;to go no further&mdash;the two successive regulations
for conducting business supply in this case abundant
materials for the question. And it is just as impossible
for a man who has a notion of historical certainty to
believe in any one else's mind being changed by the
<pb n='487'/><anchor id='Pg487'/>
decree of an assembly of Bishops. If a well-educated
man told me he had just come to the conclusion that
Julius Cæsar never lived, I should not believe in his conviction
but in some disorder of his mental faculties, and
should advise him to undergo medical treatment. And
so, if the new dogma is proclaimed and the clergy
submit either tacitly or expressly, no cultivated man
in all Germany will believe that the thousands of
scientifically trained men who have had a German
education have suddenly changed their convictions,
because some hundreds of Italians and Spaniards have
chosen to decree away the testimony of history.
<q>Facts are stubborn things.</q> Public opinion will recognise
only two alternatives in the case of those who
submit, ignorance or dissimulation and falsehood. And
the effect will be an immeasurable moral degradation
of the Catholic clergy and a corresponding decay of
their influence.
</p>

<p>
This consideration will not of course make the
slightest impression on the majority of the Council, or
even on those Germans who belong to it. We have
psychological riddles to deal with here. How, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, are
we to explain the fact that a man, who has taught the
very opposite doctrine in a manual of instruction for
<pb n='488'/><anchor id='Pg488'/>
the higher class of colleges published seventeen years
ago, and has let it pass through eleven or twelve
editions without a word being altered, is now in Rome
one of the most zealous promoters of the definition,
and is constantly affirming that all the clergy except a
few professors will readily submit?
</p>

</div>

<pb n='489'/><anchor id='Pg489'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-Second Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 29, 1870.</hi>&mdash;What I mentioned in my
last letter as a pamphlet of Cardinal Rauscher's, is a
printed memorial addressed to the Presidents of the
Council, bearing the title of <hi rend='italic'>Petitio a pluribus Galliæ,
Austriæ et Hungariæ, Italiæ, Angliæ et Hiberniæ et
Americæ Septentrionalis Præsidibus exhibita</hi>, and dated
April 20th. It states that papal infallibility is beset by
many objections and difficulties, which require an examination
such as is impossible in a General Congregation.
Among them is one of supreme importance,
bearing directly on the instruction to be given to the
faithful on the divine commandments and the relation
of the Catholic religion to civil society.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Popes have deposed Emperors and Kings, and
Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> in the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi> has established
the corresponding theory, which the Popes
openly taught down to the seventeenth century under
<pb n='490'/><anchor id='Pg490'/>
anathema, that God has committed to them power over
temporal things. But we, and almost all Bishops of
the Catholic world, teach another doctrine. We
teach that the ecclesiastical power is indeed higher
than the civil, but that each is independent of the
other, and that while sovereigns are subject to the
spiritual penalties of the Church, she has no power to
depose them or absolve their subjects from their oaths
of allegiance. And this is the ancient doctrine, taught
by all the Fathers and by the Popes before Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi>
But if the Pope, according to the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi>,
possessed both swords&mdash;if, according to Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>'s Bull
<hi rend='italic'>Cum ex Apostolatûs officio</hi>, he had absolute dominion
by divine right over nations and kingdoms,&mdash;the Church
could not conceal this from her people, nor is the subterfuge
admissible,<note place='foot'>Antonelli's, notoriously.</note> that this power exists only in the
abstract and has no bearing on public affairs, and that
Pius has no intention of deposing rulers and princes;
for the objectors would at once scornfully reply, <q>We
have no fear of papal decrees, but after many and
various dissimulations it has at last become evident
that every Catholic, who acts according to his professed
belief, is a born enemy of the State, for he holds himself
<pb n='491'/><anchor id='Pg491'/>
bound in conscience to do all in his power to
reduce all kingdoms and nations into subjection to the
Pope.</q> We need not define more precisely the manifold
accusations the enemies of the Church might
deduce from this.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This difficulty then must be most carefully sifted
before papal infallibility is dealt with. The Conference
we demanded on March 11 may do much towards
clearing it up. But the question, whether Christ really
committed to Peter and his successors supreme power
over kings and kingdoms is, especially in this day,
one of such grave importance that it must be directly
brought before the Council, and examined on all sides.
It would be inexcusable for the Fathers to be seduced
into deciding, without thorough knowledge and sifting,
on a question which has such wide consequences and
affects so deeply the relations of the Church to human
society. This question therefore must necessarily be
brought before them, before the eleventh chapter of the
<hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> can be taken in hand. It might, if
you please, be separately treated. But, as it cannot be
adequately judged of without a thorough examination
of the relations of the ecclesiastical to the civil power,
it appears to us very desirable that the thirteenth and
<pb n='492'/><anchor id='Pg492'/>
fourteenth chapters of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> should be discussed
before the eleventh.</q>
</p>

<p>
What first strikes one about this remarkable document
is, that the German Bishops belonging to the
minority&mdash;Martin, Stahl, Senestrey and the Tyrolese
are of course out of the reckoning&mdash;are not represented
here. Does this indicate a real divergence of view or
only a difference of tactics? The former notion seems
to me inconceivable. It is impossible that men like
Hefele, Ketteler, Eberhard and the rest should have any
doctrinal predilection for the system of papal absolutism
extended over sovereigns and the whole political
and civil domain. Certainly they too are so strongly
opposed to the infallibilist dogma because it involves
the mediatizing of all kings and governments. I can
therefore at present discover no explanation of this
phenomenon, and cannot allow any room for the suspicion
that the persistently active curialistic influences
have succeeded in dividing the German Bishops from
the rest of the minority.
</p>

<p>
What will the Presidents do with a document so
serious, so moderate and so incisive? What have they
done already? So far as I know, nothing. It is a
principle, and has now become an habitual practice with
<pb n='493'/><anchor id='Pg493'/>
them, to leave all representations and petitions of the
minority unnoticed and unanswered. The directing
Deputation, which is intrusted with the entire control
of the Council, feels quite justified in adopting this
line by the papal ordinances.
</p>

<p>
The policy hitherto pursued by the Jesuits and the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> was, first to extend to the utmost the comprehensive
office of the Church, as legislator for the nations
and guardian of faith and morals; and then, by making
the Pope absolute master and dictator of the Church,
to assign to him all that had been claimed for the
Church, so that he&mdash;acting of course in the interests of
religion and morality, but simply according to his own
good pleasure&mdash;should have every office, person and
institution subject to him, and that the final appeal in
every cause should lie to his tribunal. Since all this
can only be secured and guaranteed by the infallibilist
dogma, the inferences on the relations of Church and
State drawn by the opposing Bishops form precisely the
chief recommendation of that dogma in the eyes of the
Legates, the Italian Cardinals, the Spanish and Italian
Bishops and those of the French who are ultramontanes.
They all say among themselves, if not aloud before the
world, <q>That is just what we want; our very object is
<pb n='494'/><anchor id='Pg494'/>
to get the doctrine on the relations of Church and State
changed, the independence of civil society and the civil
power abolished, and the complete temporal supremacy
of the Church&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Pope&mdash;at least gradually established.</q>
It is not indeed advisable to say this as yet in
such explicit and unreserved terms, but the reason why
the infallibilist dogma is so opportune and indispensable
is exactly because it implies jurisdiction over the temporal
sphere, which the Pope can according to circumstances
either leave unused and say nothing about it, or suddenly
draw forth for use like a weapon concealed under
a mantle. He has dealt thus with the Austrian Constitution;
while he let alone other countries, whose constitutional
systems must have been partly at least a scandal
on Roman principles, he pronounced the Austrian Constitution
abominable (<foreign rend='italic'>nefanda</foreign>). And any one, who
wishes to examine the practical significance of this
infallible judgment, need only go to the Tyrol and
observe how it has been already explained there to the
inhabitants by their enthusiastic clergy.
</p>

<p>
At the audience, when he presented the French note
to the Pope, Banneville expressed the wish of his
Government that the discussion of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>
(with the chapter on infallibility) might at least not be
<pb n='495'/><anchor id='Pg495'/>
taken before its time&mdash;which was equivalent to saying,
<q>At least give us time, for the matter is not yet ripe
for discussion.</q> Hitherto delay has been for the interest
of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, for it was expected that the minority
would wither away and finally be extinguished; they
trusted to the power so often proved of the Roman
solvents. The article of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> which told the
prelates, <q>We care nothing for your talk about moral
unanimity in matters of dogma, and shall make the
new dogma in spite of your opposition,</q> was written <foreign rend='italic'>in
terrorem</foreign>, and was meant to hold up before the refractory
the terrible perspective of a contest emerging in the
abortion of an impotent schism. The article has not
in the main produced the desired effect, for the Bishops
still hold together and bind themselves by writings and
public declarations, and the number of those who can
no longer with any decency desert to the majority
threatens to increase. Now therefore it is the interest
of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> to allow no further delay, but to bring
forward the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> at once.
</p>

<p>
The Bavarian ambassador has presented the note of
his Government, which appeals emphatically to the
attitude of the German Bishops who represent in the
Council sound principles on the relations of Church and
<pb n='496'/><anchor id='Pg496'/>
State.<note place='foot'><q>Animés d'un profond respect pour l'autorité <emph>légitime</emph> du S. Siége,
nous sommes obligés d'autre part de préserver de toute atteinte présente ou
future les rapports entre l'église et l'état (as lately settled by the Concordat
and the Constitution). Nous joignons nos instances aux remonstrances
du Gouvernement français et nous nous croyons appelés à le faire
d'autant plus, que dans le sein du concile lui-même une grande partie des
représentants de l'Église d'Allemagne, dont le dévouement religieux est
bien connu, atteste par son attitude que nos craintes sont loin d'être
vaines.</q></note> It cannot indeed appeal to its own Bishops,
for three of them are active and fiery supporters of
infallibilism and the supremacy of the Pope over Kings
and States. It was previously thought impossible for a
German Bishop to desire to see the day when the Popes
could again grasp the reins of temporal dominion which
had dropped from their hands, depose monarchs, give
away countries, abolish constitutions, annul laws and
dispense oaths of allegiance. But this spectacle we
now enjoy! For the pastors of souls must be assumed
to intend to make dogmas, not for a mere pastime or
for the enrichment of theological commentaries and
text-books, but in order to reduce the theory to practice.
</p>

<p>
Pius did not say, when receiving the French memorandum,
whether he would communicate it to the Council.
But Antonelli has now stated that the Pope, though
President of the Council, will not find it at all advisable
to do so. That is only consistent, for every curialist
<pb n='497'/><anchor id='Pg497'/>
regards the Council as under strict tutelage, and in fact
only existing by the will of the Pope and living by the
breath of his mouth. It is simply from care for their
health that he withholds so unsound a document from
his Bishops. Antonelli says he will not reply to it, as
it contains nothing new, and merely repeats the note of
Feb. 20, which is not strictly true. He adheres to his
favourite distinction, <q>In theory we are inexorable,
grasping, high-flying, as Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> or Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>,
but in practice full of forbearance and compassion.
We take account of human weakness and blindness,
and, if the Northern nations do not acknowledge the
prerogatives of our priestly absolutism, and desire to
retain their political and religious liberties in spite of
our theoretical condemnation of them, we shall not force
matters to an open breach and shall make no use of
the old methods of compulsion.</q>
</p>

<p>
Now are the Governments agreed or not in reference
to the Council? They are no doubt all agreed in their
aversion to the new dogma and the renewal of the
Syllabus, but there is a great difference in their practical
attitude. The rulers in some States mean to utilize
the occasion for bringing about the entire separation of
Church and State, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, for gradually extruding the Church
<pb n='498'/><anchor id='Pg498'/>
and the clergy from all the positions of public trust
they still hold, and reducing the Church to the level of
a sect tolerated and as far as possible ignored by the
State, and secularizing education, marriage and family
life. This is the attitude of Belgium, Italy and Spain
towards the Council. Out of Belgium there is no
country so remarkably indifferent about the Council
and its decrees, whatever they may be, as Italy, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
Italian Government and many millions of Italians.
The statesmen there say, <q>We have no Concordats to
defend, for they have fallen with the old Governments;
the State has no longer any concern with religion and
the Church, which are mere private affairs of the individual.
And thus the separation of Church and State
is already in principle accomplished.</q> I can vouch for
the following saying of a high public official there:
<q>There are hundreds of us who do not know whether
we are among those excommunicated on political grounds
or not. In a dangerous illness we may send for a confessor,
and then we shall find out.</q>
</p>

<p>
The number of those who desire and aim at this
complete divorce of Church and State is legion. Their
view predominates in the French cabinet since Daru's
retirement, and most of them view what is going on in
<pb n='499'/><anchor id='Pg499'/>
Rome with satisfaction and hope. The more frantic
and insolent is the conduct of the Papalists, so much the
better in their opinion, for so much easier and more painless
will the separation be for civil society. To make
papal infallibility and the Syllabus into dogmas is in
their eyes a step which, far from hindering, one should
wish to see thoroughly effected. When the Church is
caught in this net, she must assume the full responsibility
of all doctrines and principles established by any
of the Popes, and she has herself pronounced judgment
on their utter incompatibility with the whole existing
order of society. The State can then no longer go
hand in hand with her anywhere, and will dismiss
her. It is impossible to be ignorant that this view
is widely prevalent, and is rapidly and powerfully increasing.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='500'/><anchor id='Pg500'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-Third Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, April 30, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Now that the matter has
gone so far, those about the Pope no longer make any
secret of the fact that for many years&mdash;indeed from
the beginning of his pontificate&mdash;he has formed the
design of making papal infallibility an article of faith.
A work has lately been distributed here, <hi rend='italic'>Riflessioni
d'un Teologo sopra la Riposta di Mgr. Dupanloup a
Mgr. Arcivescovo di Malines</hi>, Torino 1870. The writer
says, <q>Could the Bishop of Orleans be ignorant that
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> has always intended to define this dogma and
condemn Gallicanism? All the acts of his pontificate
have been directed to this end. Nay, we affirm distinctly
that he believed himself to have received a
special mission to define the two dogmas of papal
infallibility and the Immaculate Conception.<note place='foot'><q>Si, diciamolo altamente, Pio <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> credette aver ricevuto speciale missione
di definire la Immacolata Concezione e la infallibilita pontificia.</q></note> And as
<pb n='501'/><anchor id='Pg501'/>
he is under the special guidance of the Holy Ghost, his
will sufficiently establishes the opportuneness of this
definition.</q>
</p>

<p>
This was obviously written for the eyes of the Pontiff,
whose whole life is surrounded as with a rose-garland
of miraculous deliverances, illuminations and
divine inspirations. And thus the veil is now dropped,
and the time come for speaking openly. Up to the
end of last summer, and even till December, the
answer given from Rome to all inquiries and anxieties
of Bishops or Governments was, that there was no intention
of bringing infallibility before the Council and
that the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> was mistaken; the Court of Rome was
not responsible for what an individual Jesuit might
write. Antonelli gave the most quieting assurances on
all sides. But meanwhile the Committee of Theologians
employed in preparing the materials for the
Council had already voted this new dogma, under
direction of the highest authority, and Archbishop
Cardoni had sent in his report upon it, which was
received by all against the single vote of Alzog. The
subjects to be brought before the Council were carefully
concealed from the Bishops, and an oath of silence
imposed on the theologians who were summoned, in
<pb n='502'/><anchor id='Pg502'/>
order that they might come to Rome unprepared and
without the necessary books, and might simply indorse
the elaborations of the Jesuits as voting-machines in
the prison-house of the Council.
</p>

<p>
It is merely repeating what is notorious in Rome to
say that Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> is beneath comparison with any one
of his predecessors for the last 350 years in theological
knowledge and intellectual cultivation generally. One
must go back to Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> and Julius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> to find
Popes of similar theological and scientific attainments.
It is known here that, small as are the intellectual
requisites for ordination in the Roman States, it was only
out of special regard to his family that Giovanni Maria
Mastai could get ordained priest. His subsequent
career offered no opportunity or means for supplying
this neglect, and thus he became Pope with the feeling
of his entire deficiency in the necessary acquirements.
This unpleasant consciousness naturally produced the
idea that the defect would be remedied without effort
on his part by enlightenment from above, and divine
inspiration would supply the absence of human knowledge.
This illusion has been and will be so common,
that we need not have troubled ourselves about it, did
it not threaten now to become a destructive firebrand.
<pb n='503'/><anchor id='Pg503'/>
The public letters which have passed of late between
the assembled Fathers on the absorbing question of
the day deserve attention. They show the deep gulf
which divides the members of the Episcopate. There
is Spalding, Archbishop of Baltimore, who first wanted
to help the Pope to get his infallibility acknowledged
indirectly by his now famous <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>postulatum</foreign>, where the real
point was kept in the background, when he proposed a
decree that every papal decision was to be received
with unconditional inward assent. But now, in his
letter to Dupanloup, he has changed his mind, and
wants infallibility to be openly and explicitly defined.
So again in the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>postulatum</foreign> he had declared moral
unanimity to be necessary for a dogma, but now on the
contrary he considers a mere majority of votes to be
sufficient. Two other American Archbishops have
come forward in opposition to him, Kenrick of St.
Louis and Purcell of Cincinnati. They say that Spalding's
letter has fallen among them like a bomb-shell; it
has hitherto been their custom for such matters to be
discussed in an assembly of the American Bishops, but
that has not been done in the present case, and he has
written his letter alone and without any communication
with his colleagues. Indeed he had previously
<pb n='504'/><anchor id='Pg504'/>
advised them to oppose the definition of infallibility, as
sure to produce nothing but difficulties, but now he
has taken up just the opposite view, on what grounds
they know not. The two prelates add that American
Catholics have very special reasons for disliking the
definition, for the notion of the Pope having the right
to depose monarchs, dispense oaths of allegiance, and
give away countries and nations at his will, is equally
strange to Protestants and Catholics in their country.
They think that Archbishop Spalding will find himself
greatly embarrassed in America with his infallibilist
doctrine, as has already been the case for some years
with regard to the condemnation of religious freedom
by the Syllabus. The two Archbishops, as one sees,
tread lightly and cautiously. They are in Rome,&mdash;<q>incedunt
per ignes suppositos cineri doloso.</q> Still they
assert with American freedom of speech, <q>We, and
several more of us, believe that the dogma contradicts
the history and tradition of the Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
The citizens of the United States, whether Protestant
or Catholic, will certainly be astonished when the new
dogma comes into full force among them and its consequences
are brought to light, suddenly recalling a
long series of papal decisions into active life;&mdash;when,
<pb n='505'/><anchor id='Pg505'/>
for instance, the recent Bull (<hi rend='italic'>Apostolicæ Sedis</hi>), with its
many and various excommunications reserved to the
Pope alone becomes known, and again the decision of
the infallible Urban <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> that it is no murder to kill an
excommunicated man out of zeal for the Church, a
decision which to this day stands on record in 200
copies of the canon law. And as a commentary on
this the work of the present Jesuit theologian of the
Court of Rome, Schrader (<hi rend='italic'>De Unitate Romanâ</hi>), will
be put into their hands, from which they will learn
that the contents of all papal decrees are infallible, for
they always contain some <q>doctrina veritatis</q>&mdash;whether
moral, juridical, or rational&mdash;and the Pope is always infallible
<q>in ordine veritatis et doctrinæ.</q> Yet that is
but one flower from the dogmatic garden, into which
Archbishop Spalding will introduce the citizens of the
United States after infallibility is happily proclaimed.
They will then also hear, among other interesting
truths, that according to the irrefragable decision of Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>
every priest is absolutely free by divine and human law
from all secular authority, and no layman has any right
over him.<note place='foot'><q>Jure tam divino quam humano laicis nulla potestas in ecclesiasticas
personas attributa est.</q></note> And they must be reminded, in order to
<pb n='506'/><anchor id='Pg506'/>
make them more submissive, that in 1493 Pope Alexander
<hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> gave over their country with all its inhabitants,
<q>in virtue of the plenitude of his apostolic power,</q> to
the kings of Spain in the infallible Bull <hi rend='italic'>Inter cætera</hi>,<note place='foot'>See Raynald. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> xix. ann. 1493, 22.</note> and
then drew the famous line from the North to the South
Pole, which included whole provinces of the present
United States in his great and generous gift. By virtue
of papal infallibility they are subjects of the Spanish
Government, and who knows if right and fact may not
some day again coincide? <q>Res clamat ad dominum.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='507'/><anchor id='Pg507'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-Fourth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, May 13, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The time for the most eventful
decisions is come: to-morrow the debate on infallibility
commences. The opponents of the dogma have
taken every means to put off this decision, and now
that they are foiled, enter upon the question with the
greatest repugnance and a sense of being defeated
by anticipation in the perilous contest. The diplomatists
too, who had presented notes from their Governments
to the Vatican or had been instructed to
support the notes presented, made urgent representations
that the existing order of business should not be
departed from, so as to get the discussion of infallibility
deferred. And then some Bishops made an attempt
to move the Pope's conscience. They told him that
by this undertaking he was sowing divisions among
the faithful, shaking faith, preparing for the closing
days of his life a terrible disillusionizing and bitter
<pb n='508'/><anchor id='Pg508'/>
reproaches, and kindling a fire which after blazing up
in various parts of the Catholic world would turn into
a frightful conflagration. He was urgently entreated
to listen to some of the Bishops, who were in a position
to inform him of the real state of things in different
countries.
</p>

<p>
There has unquestionably for some time past been a
certain vacillation among the Pope's counsellors, but
never for a moment did they think of giving up the
whole enterprise, and confessing themselves defeated.
And as it was clear that, if the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign> preceding the
infallibility question were discussed in their regular
order, the hot season would set in with its miasmas, and
the inevitable prorogation of the Council would most
seriously imperil the dogma, the resolve to proceed at
once with the matter, regardless of consequences, prevailed
in the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. The Opposition tried to hinder
this intention by a solemn act. A deputation, consisting
of several Bishops of different nations&mdash;a German,
a Hungarian, and a Bohemian Bishop for Germany&mdash;was
to be sent to the Pope, with Archbishop Purcell of
Cincinnati for its spokesman, to make the most earnest
and direct representations to him. From fear of this
demonstration, and in order at once to cut off all hopes
<pb n='509'/><anchor id='Pg509'/>
placed upon it, the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> had the <hi rend='italic'>Synopsis Animadversionum</hi>
distributed in great haste, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> a selection from
the Opinions of the Bishops, partly in favour of the
dogma, partly against it. The opinions are about
equally divided, but some represent more than one
author. Thus <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> 4 Hungarians and 16 Dominicans, in
one case 24 Bishops, gave in the same Opinion. They
are all printed without the names, but some of the
writers are easily recognised, as <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Rauscher, Schwarzenberg,
Fürstenberg, Krementz, Dupanloup, Clifford,
Kenrick, etc. It is to be observed that some of these
opinions are printed word for word, while others&mdash;of the
Opposition Bishops&mdash;are cunningly tampered with, to
the great disgust of their authors. But in most cases
the reader cannot tell whether he has the opinion of a
man of high position or of a nobody before him.
</p>

<p>
In consequence of this rapid manœuvre of distributing
the Synopsis, the Opposition did not think it well to
send their deputation, which accordingly fell through.
The dogmatic constitution on infallibility was known
here on the 1st of May, but was not published for eight
days afterwards. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> was evidently not yet
quite clear about its tactics; perhaps the season might
not appear sufficiently advanced, and they might feel
<pb n='510'/><anchor id='Pg510'/>
more secure of carrying their point when the heat had
driven the foreign Bishops away and the Council was
left to the Italian and Spanish rump.
</p>

<p>
The minority however did not cease to labour for the
postponement of the infallibilist discussion. The certainty
that the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> would be in earnest about it
gave them somewhat more energy than they had shown
in the debate on the Little Catechism. The voting on
it on May 4 had been quite unexpected. For it had
been resolved that the amendments modifying the text
should first be voted on, and the whole text be decided
afterwards, when printed and brought forward in the
definitive form it had received through the voting on
the amendments. But instead of that, amendments and
text were voted upon on the same day, so that many
Bishops&mdash;including Darboy and Kenrick&mdash;were absent,
and the whole number of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non-placets</foreign> and conditional
votes together did not reach 100. This voting on May 4
was however provisional; the definitive voting takes
place to-day, Friday, May 13. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> of course
does not wish to have so considerable an Opposition
left, and has therefore somewhat altered the text, but
not in their sense. All the German Bishops of the
minority, amounting to about 40, will vote <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>,
<pb n='511'/><anchor id='Pg511'/>
as I hear, and the French also, with a single exception,
making some 30 more. Several others will join them,
so that the previous 56 <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non-placets</foreign> will be augmented
by most of the 44 prelates who voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta
modum</foreign>. The opposition to the Little Catechism may
thus reach 100 votes, and will certainly exceed 80.
</p>

<p>
One might be tempted to ask why the Opposition,
when it is so numerous, has no confidence of victory
and is always shrinking from decisive measures. It is
idle to suppose that the cancerous ulcer of infallibilism
can ever be once for all cut out of the body of the
Church, except by a scientific demonstration of its
falsehood, or its adherents subdued without a decisive
contest. This uneasy attitude of the minority arises
from the want of sympathy and confidence among its
various elements. The inopportunists are afraid of
their allies not only hindering the definition but undermining
belief in the doctrine and upsetting the whole
Jesuitical system and school of lies, and thus exposing
the contrast between the primacy as Christ founded it
and as it has since been perverted. And the others
judge from what they themselves say that their resistance
will not be firm and persevering, and that they
already think of yielding sooner or later. And even for
<pb n='512'/><anchor id='Pg512'/>
those who hold the doctrine to be thoroughly false and
unecclesiastical, it is much more convenient not to proclaim
their conviction so roundly and maintain the
opposition at all hazards, after the Pope has solemnly and
formally committed himself and done all in his power to
get the dogma defined and all condemned who reject it.
For all who openly declared the doctrine to be an error
would be declaring the Pope to be an innovator; and he
must appear to every decided opponent of infallibilism
no common innovator either, like any <q>doctor privatus,</q>
but the most fearful and dangerous enemy of revealed
truth and the pure doctrine of the Church, since he
abuses his supreme authority to impose a false doctrine
on consciences by terrorism, anathema and excommunication.
But it is too much to demand of the Bishops
to express such judgments, or give occasion for such
conclusions and alternatives. While they wish to hold
aloof from so tremendous a conflict, it is their interest
to avoid a collision which must involve such considerations.
The more many of them are ensnared in the
delusion of the present papal system, the more vivid
is their desire not to be forced into so public and
decisive an announcement.
</p>

<p>
It is exactly those Bishops who are not the strongest
<pb n='513'/><anchor id='Pg513'/>
dogmatically who display the most zeal in hindering
the discussion on infallibility, and they have done a
good deal to rehabilitate a force capable of resistance
even after the abject surrender of April 24. This
fact shows how little the astute and practised Roman
Court has succeeded in gaining over the Fathers
separately. The Hungarian primate notoriously signed
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>postulatum</foreign> against infallibility with reluctance, and
he has since openly adhered to the majority as spokesman
of the Deputation <hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi>, after he had previously
retired from the assembly of German Opposition
Bishops. He has a good right to reckon confidently on
a Cardinal's Hat; and yet it is known that he, like
almost all the Hungarians, will come forward to oppose
the definition, and will probably speak against it to-morrow.
Ginoulhiac, Bishop of Grenoble, who is perhaps
the most learned Bishop in France, after Maret,
though his learning is of a somewhat narrow and old-fashioned
kind, is by nature and education one of those
who are anxious to find some middle way, by which
they may at once bow to authority and escape the consequences
of an inexorable logic. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has long
believed his theologian's heart could be won by well-selected
citations, but other means have been also
<pb n='514'/><anchor id='Pg514'/>
employed. After he had been named to the Archbishopric
of Lyons, the Pope refused him the desired
audience and also the preconisation, so that the diocese
will have to remain many months without a chief pastor.
But he continued firm, and took part in the compilation
of a document, which might well become the most
important in its results of all the declarations of the
Opposition. The Bishop of Mayence was predisposed
by all his sympathies and antipathies to support the
cause of Rome in this Council, and he has often, as well
at Fulda as here, repudiated the notion that the Pope's
claim to infallibility is an encroachment on the divine
prerogatives. For a time he was a drag on his colleagues,
but the policy of the Court and its treatment
of the Opposition has more and more alienated him
from the curialists; so that from seeming at first in
Roman eyes to be divided by an immeasurable gulf
from men like Dupanloup, he has become a powerful
influence in the minority. The pamphlet on infallibility,
written at his suggestion, and addressed from
Solothurn to the Bishops, showed his changed attitude.
This publication is well known to have been for a time
kept back, and it was only after a contest of some
weeks with the authorities that he succeeded in getting
<pb n='515'/><anchor id='Pg515'/>
it issued. As the contemporaneous writings of Rauscher,
Schwarzenberg and Hefele met with no particular
opposition, this hostile treatment of Ketteler was
ascribed to the belief that the greater sharpness of the
German protest against the order of business, as compared
with the French, was due to him. Where the
French text speaks of the Bishops as representing the
Churches, the Germans added the remark that this was
the more important to insist upon in the case of the
Vatican Council, where so many Bishops were admitted
to vote, whose claim to vote by divine right was doubtful.<note place='foot'><q>Hæc conditio pro Concilio Vaticano eo magis urgenda esse videtur,
cum ad ferenda suffragia tot Patres admissi sunt, de quibus non constat
evidenter, utrum jure tantum ecclesiastico an etiam jure divino ipsis
votum decisivum competat.</q></note>
This historical consideration has since been urged
with great effect by Kenrick, whose decisive weight in
fixing the value of the Vatican Council will only be
known later. It was universally believed that Ketteler
had co-operated in getting this passage inserted in the
German Protest, and so one is not surprised that he
should have taken a leading part in the last move of
the Opposition. To-day a declaration, signed by 77
Fathers, has been presented to the Presidents, protesting
energetically against the inversion of the established
<pb n='516'/><anchor id='Pg516'/>
order in the interests of infallibility. It contains the
severe remark that they well know no answer can be
expected, but they are unwilling to let any doubts be
cast on the freedom of the Council, and to have the
Bishops made a public laughing-stock.
</p>

<p>
They cannot take much by this move. The arguments
against inverting the purely arbitrary order of
business, previously introduced, are weak in comparison
with the objections to the definition on principle, and
to insist on them is simply beating the air. The majority
only see proofs of their weakness and grounds for
increased confidence in the obstinate holding aloof of the
Opposition from the main question, and in the fact that
men who are not real assailants of the dogma play a prominent
part in its proceedings. Wherever there has been
any talk of hesitation, it has been only in the Vatican
and the Commission <hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi>, never among the mass of
the party. Pius may for a moment have shared the
scruples suggested to him by two of the Legates, and
the Deputation may have believed that the dogma
could be established without any violent precipitation,
and regretted the indecent zeal of the French, but the
ardent infallibilists&mdash;French, English, Belgian, Swiss,
etc.&mdash;have never slackened in their confidence or their
<pb n='517'/><anchor id='Pg517'/>
assiduity. They still affirm, as they ever have done,
that infallibility has no real opponents or hardly any,
and that the leading members of the Opposition privately
hold the view or at least have never openly
rejected it; there are but few even among the <foreign rend='italic'>Animadversiones</foreign>
which deny the admissibility of the definition.
So they think that there is a bait for every
one of these troublers of peace, and that they can all
either be won over by concessions or frightened into
submission. The example of the Prince Bishop of
Breslau, who is known to have suspended a priest for
attacking the doctrines of the Syllabus, is very interesting
in this point of view. If the Pope were to issue a
Bull condemning the opponents of his infallibility, and
to deal in the same way or&mdash;as he easily might&mdash;more
solemnly and harshly with other doctrines than the
Encyclical of 1864, Prince Bishop Förster would at least
punish all malcontents as severely as he punished the
contemner of the Syllabus.<note place='foot'>It appears from a passage in Letter <ref target='Letter_LII'>lii.</ref> that this severe judgment on
the Prince Bishop was based on an erroneous report of his conduct in the
papers.</note> Yet in spite of all this, he
is a member of the Opposition, and the majority believe
it would probably soon melt away, if the Pope could
resolve on adopting this policy. Moreover their leaders
<pb n='518'/><anchor id='Pg518'/>
speak as though the Opposition had already incurred
censures. They expect to make short work with the
German Bishops who signed the Fulda Pastoral. In
that document it is said, <q>The Holy Father is accused
of acting under the influence of a party, and desiring
to use the Council simply as a means of unduly exalting
the power of the Apostolic See, changing the
ancient and genuine constitution of the Church, and
setting up a spiritual domination incompatible with
Christian liberty. Men do not scruple to apply party
names to the head of the Church and to the Episcopate,
which hitherto we have been accustomed to hear only
from the lips of professed enemies of the Church.
And they plainly avow their suspicion that the Bishops
will not be allowed full freedom of deliberation, and
will themselves be deficient in the knowledge and
straightforwardness requisite for the discharge of their
duties in Council. And they accordingly call in
question the validity of the Council and its decrees.</q>
</p>

<p>
Here in Rome the Bishops have to listen to these
and similar observations <foreign rend='italic'>usque ad nauseam</foreign>, which
their adversaries use only to remind them of this
Pastoral. While denying before the world that the
definition of infallibility was the object of the Council,
<pb n='519'/><anchor id='Pg519'/>
or was intended at all by the holy Father, they at the
same time wrote to Rome to deprecate it, being perfectly
well acquainted with the designs of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>,
and corresponded with friendly prelates on the means
of averting it. And thus the other party may now say
to them, <q>You acknowledge yourselves that the unity
and strength of the Church is to be preferred to strict
veracity, and that in so sacred a cause some measure of
deception is allowable. Don't choose then to be better
than your neighbours. You have already abandoned
the ground of objective truth, and you may as well
come over to us altogether.</q> But the chief means of
breaking the Opposition consists in the Pope's making
the Bishops feel the full weight of his authority and
compromising himself yet more deeply.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has succeeded in setting aside the attempted
intervention of the Governments, and the
battle will have to be fought out, as is fitting, by the
Bishops themselves. In the mind of the majority it is
already over; the Deputation has issued a reply to the
objections of the minority, which deserves the most
careful attention of the theological world. It contains
a flat denial of the force of historical evidence, and
closes with a repudiation of the necessity of moral
<pb n='520'/><anchor id='Pg520'/>
unanimity.<note place='foot'><q>Jamvero infallibilitatem S. Ap. Sedis et Romani Pontificis ad doctrinam
fidei pertinere ex allatis fidei documentis constat, et contrariæ illi
sententiæ a magisterio Ecclesiæ non semel fuerunt improbatæ. Cujuscunque
ergo scientiæ etiam historiæ ecclesiasticæ conclusiones Rom. Pontificum
infallibilitati adversantes, quo manifestius hæc ex revelationis
fontibus infertur, eo certius veluti totidem errores habendas esse consequitur.</q></note> This points out the road which the loyal
Bishops of the Opposition must follow.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Postscript.</hi>&mdash;I have just heard that the definitive
voting on the Little Catechism, which was announced
for to-day's sitting, has not taken place. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
had discovered that the German and French Opposition
Bishops would vote <foreign rend='italic'>en masse</foreign> against it. No regard had
been paid to the representations and objections of those
who voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign> on May 4, and accordingly this
stronger resistance was foreseen, and the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> shrank
from appealing to a new vote. Matters remain as the
voting of May 4 left them, and it is hoped that before
the next Solemn Session the minority will be split up
by a more important controversy.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='521'/><anchor id='Pg521'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-Fifth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, May 14, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The sitting of May 4 requires
a more particular mention which shall be added here.
The reporter on the scheme of the Catechism was
Zwerger, Bishop of Seckau, who is a special favourite
of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>,&mdash;forming as he does with the Tyrolese
Rudigier and Fessler the little party of Austrian infallibilists,&mdash;a
youthful and elegant prelate, whose
Latin is seasoned with such terms as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>portraitus</foreign>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>præcautionibus</foreign>,
etc. He gave the consoling assurance that
the new Catechism should be compiled by a Commission
of Bishops named by the Pope, so that it might be
<q>omnibus numeris absolutus.</q> He added that unfortunately
he could not introduce this masterpiece into his
own diocese, but he would in principle vote for it.
</p>

<p>
The question of the Catechism is of course closely
connected with that of infallibilism. For first the
<pb n='522'/><anchor id='Pg522'/>
Catechism will quickly and strongly inoculate the
rising generation with the dogma, and secondly, as
being a papal text-book, it will familiarize all the
young from an early age with the notion, that in religion
everything emanates from the Pope, depends on
him and refers to him. Thus every one will be taught
that not only all rights, as Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> said, but all
religious and moral truths, are drawn forth by the Pope
from the recesses of his own breast.
</p>

<p>
The notion is excellent, and does infinite honour to
the Jesuits who invented it. It is like the egg of
Columbus. One cannot think at first how it did not
occur centuries ago to the astute members of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>.
But to begin with, it would have been impossible earlier
to fit this catechetical strait-waistcoat on such a Church
as was the French; and then again a sufficient motive
was wanting, for it is four centuries since any Pope
thought of introducing new dogmas into the Church.
The whole history of the Church offers but three examples
of it. The first was the attempt of Gregory
<hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> and Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> to alter the doctrine hitherto
prevalent on the relations of Church and State, and to
substitute the new doctrine of the Pope's divine right
to exercise temporal sovereignty over princes and
<pb n='523'/><anchor id='Pg523'/>
peoples. This did not succeed. The second instance
was the attempt made from the thirteenth century
downwards by the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and especially by the Jesuits,&mdash;for
which a long series of forgeries and fictions paved
the way,&mdash;to replace the primacy of the ancient Church
by something totally different, viz., an absolute monarchy,
so as to destroy the power and authority of the
Episcopate, reduce the Bishops to mere delegates or
commissioners of the Pope, and erect him into the irresponsible
master of the whole Church and all its
members, the sole source of all ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
This scheme too was wrecked on the opposition,
first of the great Councils, and afterwards of the French
Church. The third attempt, to make all Popes infallible
and thus establish the sole and universal monarchy
of the Pope, is now going on. And as the teaching of
the Church has to be altered and enriched with new
dogmas, the Jesuits who inspire the Pope have quite
rightly perceived that a Catechism clothed with
supreme authority, such as never previously existed,
must be introduced throughout the whole Catholic
world. This undertaking promises special advantages
to the Jesuit Order, and so it has been brought before
the Council, and forced rapidly and unexpectedly to
<pb n='524'/><anchor id='Pg524'/>
the vote. So little had it been anticipated, that over
100 of the Bishops in Rome were absent. Another
attempt was made in this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> to get papal infallibility
accepted by a side-wind, by inserting a statement
that the whole teaching office of the Church resided in
the primacy, to the exclusion of the Bishops. It was
felt at once that this would give the Pope a position
and authority incompatible with any other, even that of
the Church herself, and that the Bishops would entirely
lose their judicial office in matters of doctrine. Partly
on account of this passage, and partly on general
grounds, 57 Bishops voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, among whom
were Cardinals Schwarzenberg and Rauscher, Archbishops
Scherr and Deinlein, and Bishops Dinkel and
Hefele. It created a great sensation that Cardinal
Mathieu, Archbishop of Besançon, also voted against it.
He has only lately returned from his Easter visit to
France, and is said now to belong decidedly to the
minority. Among the 24 Bishops who voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta
modum</foreign>, were the Archbishops of Cologne and Salzburg,
and the Bishop of Mayence. An interval of two days
was given them to put into shape the condition on
which they wanted to make their vote dependent.
But we have already seen that, when the time was
<pb n='525'/><anchor id='Pg525'/>
come, the Legates preferred not calling for any definitive
vote.
</p>

<p>
Are we to infer from the collapse of so weighty and
pregnant a question as this of the Catechism that
henceforth everything will be settled much quicker?
I cannot say. But as early as January 22 the Pope
declared, in a Brief addressed to M. de Ségur, that the
delay in the proceedings of the Council was due to the
powers of Hell, for as it was to inflict on them their
inevitable death-blow, they wished to protract it as
long as they could. Pius is persuaded that, as soon as
the Council produces its fruits, all faults and vices will
at once disappear from human society, and all who are
in error be led into the truth. That is expressly stated
in the Brief; and these are no mere phrases, such as
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> frequently indulges in, but are uttered in
sober earnest. Pius really holds his infallibility to be
the divinely ordained panacea for effecting a thorough
cure of mankind, who are now sick unto death. He is
convinced that the fount of unerring inspiration, which
will henceforth flow incessantly from the holy Father at
Rome, will fructify all Christian lands like a supernatural
Nile stream, and overflow all human science for
its purification or its destruction. The Jesuits make
<pb n='526'/><anchor id='Pg526'/>
the decrees, who are not indeed themselves infallible,
but whose compositions, directly the Pope has signed
his name to them, become inspired and free from every
breath of error.
</p>

<p>
The psychological enigma presented by Pius can only
be solved by looking steadily at the two root-ideas,
which interpenetrate and supplement one another in his
mind. There is first his belief in the objective infallibility
of his 256 predecessors, and next his belief that
he, Mastai, has through continual invocation and worship
of the Madonna attained to an inspiration and
divine illumination of which she is the medium. This
last privilege is in his eyes, as all about him know and
occasionally say, a purely personal one, which his predecessors
did not all experience. But it strengthens
his faith in infallibilism, and&mdash;which is the main point&mdash;he
is certain by virtue of this infused illumination
that he is God's chosen instrument for introducing the
dogma. And this higher certainty naturally leads him
to regard the opposing Bishops as unhappy men snared
in the meshes of a fatal error, who rebel in their sinful
blindness against the counsel of God, and will be
dragged at the chariot-wheels of the triumphal car of
the infallible Papacy in its resistless progress, like boys
<pb n='527'/><anchor id='Pg527'/>
hanging on behind, in spite of their efforts to pull it
back. And therefore sharp rebukes&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>verbera verborum</foreign>&mdash;must
not be spared these episcopal opponents. Pius
knows that the German and American members of the
party are infected by the atmosphere of Protestantism,
and the French by that of infidelity, so that they are
suffering at least under a violent heterodox influenza,
and require drastic remedies. But no one had imagined
that all regard for decency would be so completely laid
aside, and that the Pope would so far forget his high
position as to actually descend into the arena, deal
blows with his own hand, and assail all disputants with
bitter and insulting words, as he has in fact done. He
might have waited quietly till his unconditional majority
of 500 had voted the dogma, and then have fulminated
to his heart's content the plenitude of anathemas and
curses at the still unbelieving <q>filii perditionis</q> and
<q>iniquitatis alumni,</q> in the forms that are stored up
ready for use in the Roman Chancery. But he is too
impatient to wait for the decision, and exhausts all the
weapons in his quiver by anticipation. When the
Bishops of the minority presented their first remonstrance
against the new dogma, he had it announced in
his journals that it was only from the lofty impartiality
<pb n='528'/><anchor id='Pg528'/>
which became him that he had not received their
memorial, as neither had he received those of the other
party. But now this mask is dropped, and no means
are omitted for overreaching or intimidating the minority.
It is confidently expected that fear and discouragement
will soon do their work in splitting up the
Opposition. Many of its members recoil in alarm
from the position they will be placed in by persevering
to the last. It needs more than ordinary episcopal
courage, it needs a deep conscientiousness and faith
firm as a rock in the ultimate victory of the true
doctrine of the ancient Church, to confront in open
fight the triple host of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, the Jesuits and the
ultramontanes.
</p>

<p>
And now for the first time the excellence of the
Council Hall is proved, and the wise foresight of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> in choosing it and adhering to it with the firmness
of old Romans in spite of all entreaties and representations
to the contrary. It is precisely adapted to the
present tactics of the majority. The Bishops will
occupy a number of sittings with speeches, generally
read, seldom spoken, which four-fifths of their auditors,
as before, neither understand nor wish to understand.
For the majority know everything already, they are
<pb n='529'/><anchor id='Pg529'/>
armed with a triple breastplate, and have their short
and powerful watchword, which renders them invincible.
Those who frequent infallibilist circles here may hear
St. Augustine's saying quoted ten times a day, <q>Roma
locuta est, causa finita est,</q> or St. Ambrose's <q>Ubi
Petrus, ibi Ecclesia,</q> or that St. Irenæus said every
one must necessarily agree with the Roman Church.
These are mere fables; Augustine and Irenæus said
nothing of the kind, but something quite different; and
while Ambrose did indeed use the words, it was without
the remotest reference to the Pope and his infallibility.
But the words are quoted in a hundred books
and pamphlets, and are used like theological revolvers
which never miss fire. And then Mermillod will repeat
in the Council what he lately said in a sermon here
about the threefold manifestation of God in the crib of
Bethlehem, in the Sacrament of the Altar, and&mdash;in the
Vatican. Pie of Poitiers will utter some of those bold
Oriental metaphors, which all France laughs at but
which are gravely received in the Council Hall. Manning
will commend infallibility as the one plank of safety
for mankind who are sinking in the shipwreck of scepticism,
while he sings a pæan over the triumph of the
dogma over history. There will be room even for some
<pb n='530'/><anchor id='Pg530'/>
flashes of genius from the German infallibilists, the
Tyrolese and the three Bavarians, if they can resolve on
opening their lips hitherto so firmly closed. And then
the African heat and sultry atmosphere, drying up the
brain, which have already begun to press on Rome like
a leaden pall, will come in to expedite the close. The
majority will avail themselves of the right the Pope
has conferred on them to break off abruptly the discussion,
in which nothing has been discussed, and the
Pope will appear in a Solemn Session, in the full pomp
of the earthly representative of Christ, to proclaim with
infallible certainty his own infallibility and that of all
his predecessors and successors, <q>approbante Concilio.</q>
And thus will he enter on his new empire of the world;
for he will then for the first time be the acknowledged
master and sole teacher of mankind; before, he was
only a pretender. The Bishops will bow their heads
reverently under a profound sense of their own fallibility
before the one divinely enlightened man, and the world
will go to sleep to wake next morning enriched and
blessed with the new and fundamental article of faith.
The day of the promulgation will be a great day of
creation. <q>God said, Let there be light, and there
was light, and the evening and the morning were the
<pb n='531'/><anchor id='Pg531'/>
first day</q> of the new Church, after the old Church for
1869 years had been unable to ascertain and formulize
its chief article of faith. For the Popes were always
infallible; <q>the light appeared in the darkness, and
the darkness comprehended it not.</q> From the Pentecost
of the blessed year 1870, as Manning has prophesied,
dates the age of the Holy Ghost, and the
Church is for the first time really complete. As the
Pentecost of the year 33 was the birthday of the ancient
Church, so will the Pentecost of 1870 be the birthday
of the new and infinitely more enlightened Church.
Nearly all commentators now assume that the seven
days of creation in Genesis are not seven ordinary days,
but signify a great period of the world's history. It
cannot then be taken ill if the Church, instead of distinctly
putting forward her principal dogma on the first
Pentecost, which would certainly have been the most
natural course, should have waited nineteen centuries
in the vain attempt to ascertain and formulate it, and
have only now hatched the egg in the year 1870.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='532'/><anchor id='Pg532'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Letter_XLVI'/>
<head>Forty-Sixth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, May 15, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Yesterday the discussion of
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on the Primacy began, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, speeches were
delivered for and against infallibility, for any regular
discussion is of course impossible in the Council Hall.
The Hall is really more patient than the proverbially
patient paper, as long as the majority do not get excited.
Things can be said there which would not be allowed
to be written, still less printed. The names of 69
Bishops are inscribed to speak. Bishop Pie of Poitiers
had already the day before, as reporter of the Deputation,
exceeded the expectations generally formed of
him. He had discovered a wholly new argument, to
which he gave utterance with evident self-complacency.
The Pope, he said, must be infallible, because Peter
was crucified head downwards. As the head bears the
whole weight of the body, so the Pope, as head, bears
the whole Church; but he is infallible who bears, not
<pb n='533'/><anchor id='Pg533'/>
he who is borne.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Q.E.D.</hi> The Italians and Spaniards
applauded enthusiastically. On the 14th Cardinal
Patrizzi spoke. The Pope, he observed, certainly
claims personal infallibility, but he does not therefore
wish nor is he obliged to separate himself from the
Episcopate. Certainly not, thought the minority, since
we must all assent to that claim of the infallible, so
that he cannot separate himself from us Bishops or shake
us off if he wished it. Bishop Rivet of Dijon carried off
the honours of the day among the Opposition. Bishop
Ranolder of Vesprim referred briefly but forcibly to the
dangers into which the new dogma would plunge the
Hungarian Church. Dreux Brézé, who followed worthily
in the footsteps of Pie, was this time eclipsed by a
Sicilian prelate, who said that the Sicilians had a reason
peculiar to themselves for believing the infallibility of
all the Popes. It is well known that Peter preached
in that island, where he found a number of Christians;
but when he told them that he was infallible, they
thought this article of faith, which they had never
been taught, a strange one. In order to get at the
truth about it, they sent an embassy to the Virgin
Mary, to ask if she had heard of Peter's infallibility, to
which she replied that she certainly remembered being
<pb n='534'/><anchor id='Pg534'/>
present, when her Son conferred this special prerogative
on him. This testimony fully satisfied the Sicilians,
who have ever since preserved in their hearts
faith in infallibility. This speech was really delivered
in the Council Hall on May 14. The Opposition
Bishops see a proof of the insolent contempt of the
majority in their putting up such men as Pie and this
Sicilian to speak against them.
</p>

<p>
Sicily is truly the land where faith removes mountains,
and Pius would find himself among his most
genuine spiritual children if he went to Messina.
There the letter is still preserved, which the Virgin
Mary addressed to the inhabitants and let fall from
heaven, and the feast of the <hi rend='italic'>Sacra Lettera</hi> is annually
observed with the full approval of the Roman Congregation
of Rites, when the excited populace shout in the
streets <q>Viva la Sacra Lettera.</q> The Jesuit Inchover
has written a book to prove its authenticity to demonstration.
</p>

<p>
A great many copies of the remarkable pamphlet
<hi rend='italic'>Ce qui se passe au Concile</hi> have been secretly disseminated&mdash;the
Government naturally wants to suppress it&mdash;and
it is eagerly read. I have learnt from a Frenchman
that Pius himself has read some pages, on which
<pb n='535'/><anchor id='Pg535'/>
he observed, <q>C'est mal, c'est très-mal, excessivement
mal.</q> It is clear that the author has himself collected
his notices in Rome. If its revelations show how every
usage of former Councils has been reversed and all true
freedom carefully destroyed, a further evidence of this
is supplied by the statement of the official <hi rend='italic'>Giornale di
Roma</hi> about the departure of the Americans, where the
Bishops are plainly reminded that they are liable to
arrest, and that any of them who quit Rome without
leave incur heavy censures. A German Archbishop,
who had an audience of the Pope to-day, took the
opportunity of speaking to him about the universal
aversion and resistance of the Germans to the infallibilist
dogma. It made not the slightest impression.
Pius answered: <q>I know these Germans of old, who
choose to know best about everything; every one
wants to be Bishop and Pope.</q> Yet it is notorious
that he does not understand a word of German, and
has never been in Germany or read a German book,
even in a translation. But he reads Veuillot and Margotti,
and hears the Jesuits at least three times a week.
Meanwhile the Protest drawn up by Ketteler against
the arbitrary change of the order of business was presented
on the 12th of March with 72 signatures. It
<pb n='536'/><anchor id='Pg536'/>
contains, as I said before, the words: <q>We know well
that we shall receive no answer to this any more than
to our former memorials.</q>
</p>

<p>
All German Catholics count here for half Protestants.
A German must here give special evidence of his
orthodoxy, I do not say before he is trusted, but
before he is reckoned a Catholic at all by the side of
Spaniards and Italians. Above all is German theology
in ill repute, and the mere word <q>history</q> in the
mouth of a German acts like a red handkerchief on
certain animals. The good times are gone by when
Germany was considered the classical land of obedience
in comparison with France, so copious was the influx
of Peter's pence, the Jesuits, on whom the chief hopes
are centred, have effected very little here except in
Westphalia and the Tyrol.
</p>

<p>
It is hard for the Bishops, even after a five months'
experience, to comprehend the rôle assigned them, and
to understand that they have only been summoned to
receive commands, to obey, and to do service. It is a
saying current among the Monsignori that the Bishops
are nothing but servants of the Pope. <q>Just consider
the monstrosity,</q> said one of the youngest but most
actively employed of the Cardinals to a French priest,
<pb n='537'/><anchor id='Pg537'/>
when the famous letter of censure addressed by the
Pope to the Archbishop of Paris appeared in the newspapers,
<q>this Archbishop dares to speak of rights
which belong to him! What would you say if one of
your lackeys were to talk of his rights, when you gave
him your orders?</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='538'/><anchor id='Pg538'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-Seventh Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, May 16, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The Bishops of the minority
want to bind themselves by subscribing an agreement
to vote for no formula which contains the personal infallibility
of the Pope. A calculation emanating from
them has been shown me, according to which the
strength of the Opposition is undiminished, or rather
increased. It enumerates 43 Germans and Hungarians,
40 North Americans, 29 French, 4 Portuguese, and 10
Italians. The number of Bishops from the United States
who are considered to be trustworthy is especially
worthy of notice. They have been greatly influenced
by the recent publications of the Bishops, and particularly
by the excellent work of Archbishop Kenrick of
St. Louis. When they first came to Rome they were
nearly all inclined to the new dogma, but here their
eyes have been gradually opened. The insolent and
<pb n='539'/><anchor id='Pg539'/>
despotic treatment of the Bishops, the spectacle of adulation
exhibited by persons who call themselves successors
of the Apostles, and the lamentable sophistry employed
in torturing historical facts&mdash;as <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> the case of
Honorius&mdash;all this has gradually filled these Republicans
with disgust and aversion, and driven them to the
opposite side. But clearly what has chiefly influenced
them has been the conviction produced by the controversy
that, if they take home with them the new dogma
of the Pope's political supremacy over all States, they
will be exposed to the contempt and hatred of all
educated America. And as many of them are Irishmen
by birth, they have been reminded that, as Alexander
<hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> gave the American peoples to Spain, so Adrian <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
gave Ireland to the King of England and thereby
brought misery on the emerald isle.
</p>

<p>
The Bishops of the Opposition know how to appreciate
the strength and numerical preponderance of their
rivals; they know too that, besides a cool calculation
and passive subjection to the commands of their
<q>lord,</q> a certain enthusiasm and confidence also prevail
among their ranks. There are first the numerous
missionary Bishops and Vicars-Apostolic, who must
certainly vote as they are told, for they are entirely in
<pb n='540'/><anchor id='Pg540'/>
the power of the Propaganda, and Cardinal Barnabo is
an inexorably strict master: the Orientals have experienced
that. And moreover the Bishops engaged in
converting the heathen say, <q>How conveniently the new
dogma will simplify and facilitate our work with
Negroes, Kaffirs, New-Zealanders, etc.! We have
hitherto had to refer them to the Church, of whose
nature and authority we could only impress a dim conception
on their minds with much time and trouble.
Henceforth we shall tell them that God inspires one
man in Rome with all truth, from whom all others
receive it. That is short, simple, and what a child can
understand.</q>
</p>

<p>
But the main strength of the papal army consists in
the 120 Bishops from the kingdom of Italy with the
the exception of 10, the 143 from the States of the
Church, and the 120 titular Bishops without subjects or
dioceses, most of them created by the present Pope,
who represent nobody but themselves, or rather him
who has raised them from the dust and set mitres on
their heads. That makes altogether 373 Italians. This
chosen band will remain here patiently through the heat
so unendurable to the Northern Bishops, and the question
has been already mooted in the Vatican, as I hear
<pb n='541'/><anchor id='Pg541'/>
from the mouth of one who is in its confidence, whether
it would not be best to protract the affair and defer the
final voting till these recalcitrant Northerners have
obtained the permission which will be readily accorded
them to flee from the heat and fevers, after which the
Italian and Spanish prelates would vote the darling dogma
with conspicuous unanimity. The idea deserves to be
preferred to another, which is also under consideration.
The Pope might issue a Bull defining that the moral
unanimity, which has been so much talked of, is not
necessary for Councils in voting articles of faith, and
that a simple majority is sufficient. For it is thought
that most of the minority Bishops, especially the inopportunists,
would not dare to resist the new papal
definition, and would thus be compelled at last to
succumb to the infallibilist decree. We shall soon see.
You may gather what the leaders of the minority think
of the situation from a remark of Cardinal Mathieu's,
<q>On veut jeter l'Église dans l'abîme, nous y jeterons
plutôt nos cadavres.</q>
</p>

<p>
The two Bavarian Bishops, Stahl and Leonrod, have
thought fit after two months to make a public demonstration
of their assent to Bishop Räss's condemnation
of Gratry. The explanation accepted here is that, after
<pb n='542'/><anchor id='Pg542'/>
the Bavarian note had been presented, the authorities
wished the Bavarian Bishops to make an adverse move
on the conciliar chess-board; and as these two prelates
would not openly contradict their King, the expedient
of a very late adhesion to the effusions of the Bishop of
Strasburg was chosen.
</p>

<p>
It is commonly assumed that all the Cardinals are
infallibilists as a matter of course, and the more so as
this is at bottom the only doctrine which may be said
to have been exclusively invented and built up by men
who either were already or were soon about to become
Cardinals. Still this is not quite the case. Apart
from the non-resident Cardinals, Rauscher, Schwarzenberg
and Mathieu, there are some among the residents
who would gladly be dispensed from voting for the new
foundation article of faith on which the whole edifice
is henceforth to rest. But one of them said to-day,
<q>We shall ruin our position, lose all influence, and
become the mark of endless attacks. And as every
one here has some weak and vulnerable point in his
past life, he dare not expose himself to these fatal assaults
on his character and honour from which there would be
no escape.</q> At the same time the Cardinal admitted that
the whole College has so lost its influence and become
<pb n='543'/><anchor id='Pg543'/>
so insignificant, that for six months the Pope has not
once assembled them. Antonelli and a few favourites,
with the Jesuits of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, are the people who
now construct the history of the world and the
Church.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='544'/><anchor id='Pg544'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-Eighth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, May 20, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The first week of the great
debate is drawing to a close. The Archbishops of
Vienna, Prague, Gran, Paris, Antioch and Tuam have
spoken against the infallibilist definition. So much is
gained; the Catholic world knows that it is represented
in Council, while the Court party is robbed of some
illusions about the strength of the resistance to be
looked for. The only fruit of its better knowledge as
yet observable is seen in an increased obstinacy and
a greater insolence of tone. The Commission has
already declared by anticipation, in its reply to the
remarks of the Bishops against the dogma, that the
denial of infallibility is condemned under pain of censure,
and scientific arguments are no longer available.
The giving out of this watchword does excellent service
to the majority, who are very shy of theological arguments
and treat their opponents as heretics. That
<pb n='545'/><anchor id='Pg545'/>
far-famed courtesy, which has hitherto been an ornament
if not exactly a real excellence of Rome, has
greatly diminished, and the hypocrisy so long spun out
has disappeared; it has become necessary to recognise
the broad gulf which divides parties. And this has
produced a tendency on the side of the Court and the
majority to push their claims to the extremest point, to
play for high stakes, and hold out no prospect of concessions
beforehand. The minority is in their eyes not
a power to be negotiated with but a gang of insolent
mutineers to be put down. The mass of the majority
have carried their leaders with them, and only passion
now prevails in that camp. But the harshness and
roughness the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> has thought it necessary to display
has done more to strengthen the Opposition than the
changes and concessions already pre-arranged will do
to dissolve it. They have been suffered in this way to
gain a position which they might never have won if the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> had exercised more foresight. Whether all the
elements of the Opposition will be found reliable, pure
in their aims and loyal in their hearts, the future will
show. At present I only record the audacious policy of
the majority based on cunning calculations, as it has
been evinced in the early days of the discussion. But
<pb n='546'/><anchor id='Pg546'/>
the majority naturally includes men of different minds;
there are some who would like to be well rid of the
affair, and others who would gladly discover a formula
not looking like a positive innovation which might
satisfy opponents, while the great mass of them want
the blow to be struck so that, after crushing the Opposition
within the Council, they may annihilate it without
the Council also. These last have the upper hand
in the majority, and will probably retain it till the
general debate is over and the doctrine itself and its
definition come to be discussed. They are led by cool,
calculating heads, but consist for the most part of the
uneducated and unlearned mass of the episcopate who
have no independence, the people who during Strossmayer's
speech presented the spectacle of a rabble of
conspirators rather than an ordered assembly. To keep
them in the requisite state of exaltation the speeches
must be adapted to their intellectual level. And as
they are more easily excited than controlled they do
not of course exhibit the majority in a favourable
light, and one may be prepared at any moment for
the Council being disgraced by an outbreak of their
frenzy. Nothing more of the kind however has happened
yet.
</p>

<pb n='547'/><anchor id='Pg547'/>

<p>
At the head of the extreme party stands the close
ally of the Jesuits, the Archbishop of Westminster.
He was the first to say out with the utmost distinctness
that infallibility belongs to the Pope alone and
independently of the Episcopate. The ultramontane
speakers, Pie, Patrizzi and Deschamps, have vied
with one another in their endeavours to get this extreme
view of Manning's accepted, which they themselves
did not all share before. The emancipation of
the Pope from the entire Episcopate is the very turning-point
of the whole controversy, the object for which the
Council was put on the stage; infallibility tied to the
consent of the united or dispersed Episcopate nearly all
the Bishops would accept, for very few indeed clearly
understand that even Councils depend on another consent
than that of the Episcopate. But such a definition
of infallibility would cost Rome the very thing
she has laboured so much and sinned so much to
gain. It is a great advantage for the Opposition that
in this matter there are no formulas of compromise
possible but such as are manifestly perfidious and
insincere.
</p>

<p>
On the 17th Deschamps, Archbishop of Mechlin,
made perhaps the most important, certainly the most
<pb n='548'/><anchor id='Pg548'/>
remarkable, speech delivered in favour of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Constitutio</foreign>.
He is considered the ablest speaker of his party, which
notoriously has no superabundance of good speakers,
and is said to be a superficial man who takes things
easily. He not only committed himself to the extremest
section of the party, but denounced his opponents as
bad Christians not walking in the fear of God. The
change of tone was much remarked in him, as in the
Bishop of Poitiers. Manning exhibits the same change,
who now maintains that all who do not submit to the
majority might well be excommunicated directly after
the promulgation of the decree. Two German Bishops,
Greith and Hefele, spoke on the same day; and indeed
in this debate many weighty voices will be raised from
every land where the contest about the Church is being
fought, to point to the practical dangers involved in
the circumstances of the case&mdash;a kind of argument Pius
is wont to put aside with a <q>Noli timere.</q> Greith of
St. Gallen spoke for Switzerland; as a learned theologian
he declared himself against the definition on scientific
grounds, and as a Swiss Bishop on account of the present
circumstances of his country; for he is persuaded
that his Swiss brother bishops, with their zeal for the
infallibilist decree, are simply forging weapons against
<pb n='549'/><anchor id='Pg549'/>
the Church for the Radicals. Bishop Hefele of Rottenburg
touched in the course of his speech on the affair
of Honorius, which must later on come into the discussion.
Next day Hefele read Cardinal Rauscher's speech.
But Cardinal Schwarzenberg's address exceeded all
expectations and left a profound impression. Cardinal
Donnet and the Archbishop of Saragossa, who spoke in
the name of the Deputation, did not bring the defence
any further or develop any new points of history, and&mdash;which
is more important&mdash;gave no further information
about the plans and hopes of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> and the
majority.
</p>

<p>
On Thursday the 19th Cardinal Cullen, Archbishop
of Dublin, spoke, who for twenty years has been the
protagonist of Romanism in the British isles. With
sound tact he chose the most learned Bishop of the
minority, Hefele, for attack, and assailed not his speech
but his publications. Yet he did not attempt to refute
him, but only to prove that he had contradicted himself,
since the account of Honorius given in his History
of Councils is different from that in his latest work.
It is true that in the History, where no doctrinal inferences
were to be drawn, the theological significance
of the condemnation of Honorius does not receive the
<pb n='550'/><anchor id='Pg550'/>
same exhaustive appreciation and exposition as in the
little tractate on the question whether he was justly
condemned for heresy. But there is no difference of
principle between the two works; in both Hefele says
plainly that Honorius was justly pronounced a heretic,
even if he was no heretic at heart. But when the two
passages are separated from each other, it can be made
to look as though he had maintained in the former that
Honorius was really orthodox whereas he now declares
that he was a heretic. But the process could with
equal reason be reversed, and the heresy of Honorius
shown to be affirmed in the History and his orthodoxy
in the pamphlet. But what use would even an orthodox
Pope be for upholding the purity of the Church's
doctrinal deposit, if he used heretical formulas to
express his own really true opinion?
</p>

<p>
None the less however was Cullen's attack received
with great satisfaction, for the ruling powers know well
enough on what the Bishop of Rottenburg's opposition
is based, and think to subdue German science&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
devil himself&mdash;in his person. On the same day the
Patriarch Jussuf uttered words that deserve to be laid
to heart on the consequences such a dogmatic blunder
would entail in the East&mdash;a significant indication that
<pb n='551'/><anchor id='Pg551'/>
the Orientals are not prepared to bend obediently under
the yoke of a decree aimed at their ritual and their
rights as well as their tradition. The Archbishop of
Corfu answered him next day. There is very little
that can be properly called debating, for the order of proceedings
is better suited for academical addresses than for
real discussion; the practice of making prelates speak in
their order of precedence makes any honest interchange
of blows impossible. But the Greek coming forward
to speak looked like a preconcerted answer to the
Armenian. The Archbishop of Corfu insisted that, so
far from the dogma rendering the reunion of the Greek
Church more difficult, such a result was inconceivable
without it, nor could the dogma excite any suspicion,
because the Greeks found it in their tradition as well
as their Fathers and Councils, and envied the Latin
Church her infallible Pope. In evidence of this he
cited the passages where the Pope's primacy is recognised.
The great body of the Fathers listened to this
with grave faces: it was only following the style of their
own theologians.
</p>

<p>
But three more important speakers had been heard
before the Corfiote. The first was Simor, primate of
Hungary, who was chosen, as is well known, into the
<pb n='552'/><anchor id='Pg552'/>
Deputation on Faith and has shown himself a more
zealous advocate of its proposals and adherent of the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> than ever. The majority believed that it possessed
in him a master of Latin who could rival the
eloquent leader of the Opposition, and Simor justified
his reputation as an accomplished Latinist. But he
spoke&mdash;assuredly to the no small disgust and amazement
of the majority&mdash;as an unequivocal opponent of
the proposed decree. And this implied that the whole
Hungarian Episcopate would vote against it. He was
followed by a feeble old man whose speech fell flat after
that of the eloquent primate, and who could only be
known to a few of his hearers, though he holds an
important place in the history of the last generation. This
was John MacHale, for the last thirty-five years Archbishop
of Tuam and formerly the most powerful prelate
in Ireland, a famous name in the days of O'Connell;
but his political rôle has long been played out, and he
belongs to a bygone age and an obsolete school. For the
twenty years during which Cullen has been introducing
Roman absolutism into Ireland his influence has been
on the decline, and while he was expounding his
antagonism to the definition to-day in a long and complicated
address, men said to themselves, <q>magni
<pb n='553'/><anchor id='Pg553'/>
nominis umbra.</q> It was the accumulated debt of twenty
years he paid off to Cardinal Cullen. But he can
hardly be expected to have gained over any of his
countrymen to the Opposition besides the three or four
of them who already belong to it.
</p>

<p>
MacHale was succeeded by the Archbishop of Paris,
the most accomplished and skilful, and therefore the
most feared, of all the Opposition prelates. Darboy was
lately the most influential advocate of that system of
dallying and postponement which has so grievously
injured the minority, and was involved through his
intimate alliance with the Tuileries in the unhappy
policy of his Government, so that he had become somewhat
less trusted and influential. So much greater was
the impression produced by his speech to-day, wherein
he declared distinctly and repeatedly that a dogmatic
decree not accepted by the whole Episcopate could not
have any binding force. A suppressed murmur which
ran through the ranks of the majority as he spoke
seems to herald coming storms.
</p>

<p>
So far the Opposition has made its voice clearly
heard. That it has on its side reason, Scripture and
history signifies nothing for the moment; what is important
is that it makes its strength felt, that it has
<pb n='554'/><anchor id='Pg554'/>
won over waverers or doubters to its ranks, and that it
has at last spoken plainly. The position of parties and
the question itself will take many new shapes, when
the separate chapters of the Constitution come on for
discussion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='555'/><anchor id='Pg555'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Forty-Ninth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, May 26, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The intellectual superiority of
the Opposition has made itself so sensibly felt in the
course of the debate on infallibility that they have
visibly won in spirit and confidence, while a decrease
of the assurance of victory hitherto manifested by the
majority is observable. There is no sign yet of the
breaking up of the Opposition or the desertion of its
members to the infallibilist camp. The Court party had
confidently reckoned on a considerable number of mere
inopportunists giving in and separating from the opponents
of the actual doctrine of infallibility, as soon as
the dogma came to be discussed. The latter was said
to be a mere tiny fraction, who would eventually take
fright at their own impotence and come over. But as
yet this hope has not been realized, and there are many
indications that it is not likely to be realized, for the
course of events and their experiences in Rome, as well
<pb n='556'/><anchor id='Pg556'/>
as the discussions, both oral and written, have converted
inopportunists into decided fallibilists. Cardinal
Schwarzenberg has spoken with great power and
dignity, and even the most zealous adherents of the
Roman dogma must have been somewhat impressed
by his declaration that its effect in Bohemia would be
to make the nation first schismatic and then gradually
Protestant. It at the same time illustrated the conduct
of the Jesuits in a way that will not be forgotten.
When the Archbishop of Paris affirmed that the much
desired infallibilist decree was not one of the causes of the
Council, but its sole cause, every one felt what a bitter
truth had been uttered, and that the veil would thereby
be torn away from that web of untruths and dishonest
reticences about the object of the synod, by which the
Bishops had been deceived and enticed as it were into
a trap to Rome. Veuillot indeed had openly said
in his official organ at the end of April, that to decree
the new dogma was the principal and at bottom the
sole office of the Council. That was at the very time
when about eighty Bishops put out their strong protestation
that they had come to Rome under the erroneous
impression, deliberately suggested by the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, that the
question of infallibility would not be brought before
<pb n='557'/><anchor id='Pg557'/>
the Council; while yet Cardoni had many months before,
in the Commission on Faith, presented by command
of the Pope the report which has lately been printed,
and the whole Commission had agreed with him that
papal infallibility should be defined. That same Commission,
with the Jesuit Perrone and Dr. Schwetz of
Vienna at its head, has now presented an address to
the Pope urging the definition of the new article of
faith, without which those worthies think they cannot
exist any longer.
</p>

<p>
The infallibilist speaker who created most sensation
was Cardinal Cullen, Archbishop of Dublin. He
gained the warm applause of his party by the aggressive
tone of his speech, in which he attacked especially
Hefele and Kenrick. He appealed to the testimony of
MacHale to show that the mind of Ireland has always
been infallibilist&mdash;a glaring falsehood, as is proved by
the famous Declaration of the Irish Catholics in 1757
formally repudiating the doctrine. And it made no
slight impression, when the grey-haired MacHale rose
to repudiate the pretended belief in infallibility not
merely for himself but for Ireland. But it is certainly
true that in former times for more than a century the
Irish people, like the Spanish, was victimized to papal
<pb n='558'/><anchor id='Pg558'/>
infallibility. Every Irishman or Spaniard, who knew
the history of his country, would recoil with horror from
a theory which has borne such poisonous fruit for both
nations in the past and may be equally injurious in
the future. To acquaint the Catholic tenants in Ireland
with the infallible decisions of Popes about heresy
and heretics would be enough at once to increase ten-fold
the agrarian crimes prevalent there, and would be
the surest means for reproducing such a massacre as
occurred there in 1641.
</p>

<p>
When Cullen replied to the Archbishop of St. Louis,
<q>non est verum,</q> the aged prelate requested leave of
the Legates to defend himself briefly. It was refused.
Hefele was as little free to answer Cullen's attack, and
has therefore had a pamphlet in his justification printed
at Naples. A new work by one of the most illustrious
of the French Bishops is also expected from Naples,
designed to prove against the Jesuits of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> the
necessity of moral unanimity for dogmatic decrees.
Another Irishman, Leahy, Archbishop of Cashel, said
such absurd things in favour of the Court dogma that
his speech was considered a clear gain for the minority.
</p>

<p>
There are 89 speakers inscribed for the general
debate, and not a third of them have yet spoken. This
<pb n='559'/><anchor id='Pg559'/>
opens out a prospect of the debate being spun out to
a great length, oppressive as the tropical heat is now
become. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> still relies on the Northerners
being tamed down. If only a good many of them
would emulate the example of the Bishop of Hildesheim,
and go away! The plan has often succeeded
with English and Irish juries, of locking them up, when
they could not agree, till they found a true verdict. But
that won't answer here. On the contrary the longer
the debate lasts, the more numerous the Opposition
party becomes. At first many Bishops thought they
might fairly gratify the good and amiable Pius, who won
all hearts, even by making a new dogma, and give him
the present he so greatly longed for. But Pius
has completely cured his former worshippers of this
disposition to make an article of faith <q>pour les beaux
yeux du Pape.</q> It has no doubt happened before that
Italian Bishops have been treated by the Pope like
servants, hired for the day's work and dismissed again
if they did not obey the orders of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. One need
only refer to that parody on a synod, the fifth Lateran
assembly, when Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> propounded downright forgeries
and untruths to his Italian Bishops, who had
to call themselves an Œcumenical Council, and dictated
<pb n='560'/><anchor id='Pg560'/>
their votes. But even there no one ventured to treat
Transalpine Bishops&mdash;Germans, French and Hungarians&mdash;with
the insolent contempt now shown, to refuse
even a reply to their urgent petitions and representations,
and to make them drain the cup of humiliations
and grievances to the very dregs. But the great task
to be achieved in the first months of the Council was
the kneading and manipulating the Bishops in all possible
ways, so as to make them feel the immeasurable
gulf between the master and the servants, that they might
be more ready at last to sacrifice their episcopal dignity
and ancient rights on the altar of Roman supremacy.
When once they have assented to the infallibilist
dogma, they neither can nor ought to be or desire to
be anything else but passive and unintelligent promulgators
and executors of papal commands and decrees
on faith. That what is really required of them is to
abdicate their office as a teaching body and themselves
abolish their authority, Ketteler has lately declared
without reserve in the Congregation; and he is a man
who has profited much by his Roman schooling,
though in a quite different sense from what his master
intended. The Roman system of drill does not
succeed with Germans, Hungarians and Americans.
</p>

<pb n='561'/><anchor id='Pg561'/>

<p>
A note received a fortnight ago from Paris by M. de
Banneville, to be communicated or read to Cardinal Antonelli,
has created great excitement here, owing to his
studiously concealing it from his diplomatic colleagues.
Its substance is as follows: France renounces any
further interference with what is going on here, and
contents herself henceforth with taking note of the
decisions of the Pope and the Council. The Government
has done its duty, as a friendly Catholic power,
in seeking to withdraw the Court of Rome from the
perilous path on which it has entered. The attempt
has proved fruitless. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> seems resolved to
ruin itself. France will maintain the attitude of a
passive spectator, but accepts the altered condition of
things introduced by this declaration of war on the
part of the Roman Court. On the day of the definition
the Concordat ceases to be in force and the previous
relation of Church and State expires. The State separates
itself from the Church and the French troops
leave Rome. Separation of Church and State means in
France and elsewhere that the budget of worship will
be dropped, and the clergy must be supported by the
faithful. And here I may mention a fact which has
come to my knowledge on the best authority. When
<pb n='562'/><anchor id='Pg562'/>
Count Daru was going to despatch his famous memorial
to the Holy See, he wished for an interpolation in
the Chamber on the attitude of the Government towards
the occurrences in Rome, and a friend of his applied
on the subject to one of the most celebrated orators of
the Left, who declined, saying, <q>Rome fait trop bien
nos affaires pour qu'il soit de notre intérêt de lui créer
des embarras.</q> The contents of the note mentioned
above are confirmed by the words of a leading statesman
at Paris, quoted by a Bishop who has lately returned
from thence, that for his own part he considered
the separation of Church and State in France inevitable.
He had however assented to the well-meant attempt
of Count Daru to warn the Pope, and if possible deter
him from his short-sighted enterprise; but as that
attempt had proved futile, it remained to take advantage
of the blunders of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. So enormous a
spiritual power as the Court of Rome was aiming
at was incompatible with the possession of secular
power, and accordingly the French troops must be
withdrawn from Rome, and matters left to take their
course.
</p>

<p>
Even now there is a wish discernible among Cardinals
like di Pietro, Corsi and Bilio, to discover some
<pb n='563'/><anchor id='Pg563'/>
intermediate formula, while the party men, like Manning,
Pie, Cullen, and all who have been concerned in the
agitation and have staked their credit on its result, hold
to the most uncompromising form, as laid down in the
existing programme. The latter reckon on their overpowering
preponderance of numbers, on the power of
the Pope, and the dread of ecclesiastical methods of
coercion, such as excommunication and the like, whereby
all resistance will be certainly put down. On the
other hand, the Cardinals and members of the Papal
Cabinet just referred to prefer to set their hopes on the
hazy views and yielding temper of many Bishops of
the minority, and think that an ambiguous formula
might serve at once to delude and divide them. Their
watchword is <q>conciliazione, un partito di conciliazione.</q>
But all their ingenuity is expended in the elaboration
of a phrase which may contain in a somewhat allegorical
and obscure form the infallibility and universal
monarchy of the Pope. To this conciliatory section
also belongs a man who understands the greatness of the
danger clearly enough, and who so lately uttered words
which have become notorious here: <q>This Pope began
by destroying the State, and now will close his career
by destroying the Church too.</q> Yet the speaker of
<pb n='564'/><anchor id='Pg564'/>
these words does not scruple to use his high position
and influence for actively furthering the undertakings
which must lead to the catastrophe.
</p>

<p>
It is impossible for outsiders to form anything like an
adequate conception of the complication of views and
plans and the multifarious activity of the Roman <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>prelatura</foreign>.
Things happen which must appear incredible to
every one who has heard of the proverbial skill and gift of
accurate calculation possessed by the ruling clergy here.
Thus a member of a powerful Order is sentenced to six
years' imprisonment by the Holy Office on account of an
occurrence in a nunnery here, the convent being at the
same time broken up and the nuns distributed over
other convents. Yet after scarcely two years' imprisonment
this man, who is unhappily a German, is brought
back here, and intrusted with the preparation of the
draft decrees for the Council, and now the Court trusts
to its favourite <q>segreto del S. Ufficio</q> for the cause
of his sentence and of the dissolution of the convent
not coming to the ears of the Bishops, but in vain. The
matter has created too great a sensation, and the culprit
is too well known.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the minority are being plied with reasons,
which are only mentioned cursorily, or not at all, in
<pb n='565'/><anchor id='Pg565'/>
the printed documents of the Court and the majority.
They are told that all their own interests depend on
the papal authority being preserved intact, and that
the evils they fear from the proclamation of the dogma
cannot come into comparison with this common interest.
They are bidden to remember how far the
Pope has already committed himself in this matter;
since John <hi rend='smallcaps'>xxii.</hi>&mdash;more than 600 years ago&mdash;no Pope
has thrown the Brennus sword of his authority into the
scale to decide a question of doctrine, but Pius has cut
himself off from all possibility of retreat by his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>,
his conversations with many Bishops, and his letters of
encouragement and commendation to infallibilist writers.
He has declared, not once or twice but a hundred times,
that he knows and <emph>feels</emph> his infallibility, and wills the
Catholic world to believe it. He might simply by a
Bull condemn all who oppose it as heretics, and how
many of the Bishops would summon courage to resist
the Bull?
</p>

<p>
As yet these reasons, practical as they appear, have
not produced much effect. The Opposition grows
visibly, and the speeches of its members have produced
an impression quite unexpected by themselves. The
words of the Melchite Patriarch, Jussuf, have kindled
<pb n='566'/><anchor id='Pg566'/>
a flame among the Orientals too, and there are Bishops
who tell me they had not thought it possible for a discourse
in the Council Hall to produce so great a revolution
of feeling. But I will not conceal from you that you
may find in Margotti's <hi rend='italic'>Unita</hi>, which draws its information
from the highest authority, news in comparison to
which my statements must appear pure fables. He
writes from here on the 18th of May, <q>The action of
the Holy Ghost is beginning to be felt; the Opposition
diminishes daily. Cardoni has just issued his masterly
work on papal infallibility, and now every one comprehends
that it is the sole remedy and defence against
the dominant pest of journalism and a free press. We
must have a Pope who, being himself infallible, can
<emph>daily</emph> teach, condemn and define, and whose utterances
no Catholic ever dares to doubt.</q><note place='foot'><q>Al male dominante della licenza dei tipi, per cui il giornalismo nega
e bestemmia ogni giorno, bisogna contraporre il salutare rimedio del Papa
infallibile, che ogni giorno può insegnare, condannare, definire, senza che
mai sia licito ai cattolici dubitare de' suoi oraculi.</q></note> So runs the statement
in the <hi rend='italic'>Unita</hi> of May 24. Inconceivable blindness
of past generations, who allowed whole centuries
to pass without needing or asking for a single papal
definition! Henceforth the definition wheel, which the
Pope is to turn, is never to remain still for a day&mdash;because
of journalism.
</p>

<pb n='567'/><anchor id='Pg567'/>

<p>
Thus does civilisation increase the wants of men.
Our forefathers had to lead a joyless life without sugar,
coffee, tea, alcohol and cigars, and stood on so low a
level of cultivation that they fancied they got on very
well without any infallible papal definition. But we,
who are so gloriously advanced, require besides bodily
enjoyments many&mdash;if possible very many&mdash;daily infallible
definitions, and the Pope, out of sheer inexhaustible
goodness, is on the point of acceding to the
earnest prayers of 180 millions and opening the definition
machine. Veuillot lately declared it was high
time that the fact of the Pope's permanent divine
inspiration should be universally acknowledged; Margotti
says that we want not only this, but daily
definitions.<note place='foot'>[The English Jesuit, Father Gallwey, says they will be like <q>the daily
provision of manna</q> to the Israelites.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> In this noble rivalry of the two Court
journalists the Italian has evidently stolen a march
on the Frenchman.
</p>

<p>
In my former statistics the number of Americans
was put too high and of French too low. Only 23
Americans were lately calculated to belong to the
Opposition, to whom must be added 10 Orientals, 4
Portuguese, 10 Italians and 5 Spaniards, making the
whole minority over 120.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='568'/><anchor id='Pg568'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fiftieth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, May 27, 1870.</hi>&mdash;New speakers are continually
inscribing their names for the debate on
infallibility. And as only four can usually speak in
one sitting, it is impossible to foresee the end of
the general debate, after which the detailed discussion
of the separate chapters is to follow. The
minority seem resolved at this second discussion to
enter thoroughly for the first time on the numerous
separate points, exegetical, dogmatic and historical,
which offer themselves for consideration. If the
majority and the Legates allow this, the end will not
be near reached by June 29; and after that date
residence in Rome is held to be intolerable and the continuation
of the Council impracticable. This last assumption
I conceive to be mistaken. The Pope can very
easily go to Castel Gandolfo for his summer holidays,
while he leaves the Council to go on here. That it
<pb n='569'/><anchor id='Pg569'/>
should consist of hundreds of Bishops is quite unnecessary;
former Popes have known how to manage in such
cases. Eugenius <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> had his Florentine Council nominally
continued, after the Bishops were all gone except
a handful of Italians; Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> was content with about
sixty Italians at his so-called fifth Lateran Council.
What is to hinder Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> from keeping on the Council,
after the Northern and distant Bishops are departed,
with the Bishops of his own States and the titular
episcopate resident in Rome, together with a host of
Neapolitans and Sicilians? Some too would be sure
to remain of the leaders and zealots of the majority.
But the Court party can cut short the discussion and
push matters to a vote whenever they like. The order
of business enables them to do so, but of course this
imperial policy will only be applied when the Pope
gives the signal.
</p>

<p>
Nearly the whole sitting of May 25 was taken up by
a speech of Manning's, who justified the expectations
formed of him by assuring the Opposition that they
were all heretics <foreign rend='italic'>en masse</foreign>. But he left the question
undecided, whether they had already incurred the
penalties of heresy prescribed in the canon law. Ketteler's
speech made a precisely opposite impression.
<pb n='570'/><anchor id='Pg570'/>
Men were in a state of eager suspense as to what he
would say, for he was known to have passed through a
mental conflict. Ten months ago, in his publication on the
Council which was then convoked, he had come forward
of his own accord as the advocate of papal infallibility;
he had come to Rome full of burning zeal and devotion
for the Pope, though at Fulda he had declared the new
dogma to be inopportune. I omit the intermediate
steps of the process of disillusionizing and sobering he
has gone through. His speech has shown that, like
many others, he has become from an inopportunist a
decided opponent of the dogma itself.
</p>

<p>
Such a change of mind based on a conscientious
weighing of testimonies and facts is inconceivable and
incredible to a regular Roman. When some of the
Vicars Apostolic who are supported at the Pope's cost
signed the representation against the definition, the
indignation was universal among the Monsignori and
in the clerical world here. <q>Questi Vicari, che mangiano
il pane del Santo Padre!</q> they exclaimed in
virtuous disgust. That a poor Bishop, and one too who
is maintained by the Pope, should yet have a conscience
and dare to follow it, is thought out of the question
here; and this view comes out with a certain <foreign rend='italic'>naïveté</foreign>.
<pb n='571'/><anchor id='Pg571'/>
The anxiety of the German Bishops about the new
dogma perplexing so many Christians and shaking or
destroying the faith and adherence to the Church of
many thousands can hardly be mentioned here, so
impatient are the Monsignori and Cardinals at hearing
of it. People here say, <q>That does not trouble us the
least; the Germans at best are but half Catholics, all
deeply infected with Protestantism; they have no Holy
Office and have little respect for the Index. Pure and
firm faith is to be looked for among the Sicilians,
Neapolitans and Spaniards; and they are infallibilists
to a man. And even in Germany your women and
rustics are sound. Why do you have so many schools,
and think every one must learn to read? Take example
from us where only one in ten can read, and all believe
the more readily in the infallible living book, the Pope.
If thousands do really become unbelievers, that is not
worth speaking of in comparison with the brilliant
triumph of the Papacy now rendered infallible, and the
inestimable gain of putting an end to all controversy
and uncertainty in the Church for the future.</q> When
I look at the careless security of the majority, I could
often fancy myself living in the year 1517. The view
about foreign countries and Churches prevalent here is
<pb n='572'/><anchor id='Pg572'/>
just what Molière's Sganarelli expresses about physicians
and patients: <q>Les veuves ne sont jamais pour nous,
et c'est toujours la faute de celui qui meurt.</q>
</p>

<p>
The finance minister has had the bad condition of
the papal treasury communicated to the Bishops; a
standing annual deficit of 30 million francs, and the
Peter's pence decreasing! Some new means of supply
must be discovered, and the extremest extension of
ecclesiastical centralization and papal absolutism has
always been recognised at Rome as the most productive
source of revenue. Every one here believes that the
new dogma will prove very lucrative and draw money
to Rome by a magnetic attraction. It will make the
Pope <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de jure</foreign> supreme lord and master of all Christian
lands and their resources. The ultramontane jurists
and theologians have long maintained that he can
compel States as well as individuals to pay in to him
such sums as are required for Church purposes. And
there is no more urgent need for the Church now, than
that an end should be put to the deficit of the Roman
Government. And if it should be impossible or unadvisable
to put in force these supreme monetary rights of the
Papacy at once, still, when the temporal supremacy of
the Pope is made an article of faith, Rome possesses
<pb n='573'/><anchor id='Pg573'/>
the key which may be used at the right moment for
opening the coffers and money-bags. And therefore
the opponents of the dogma are regarded as enemies of
the Roman State economy and the wealth of the Roman
clergy; and the variance between the two parties is
embittered.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the Pope is never weary of carrying on
his personal solicitations for the votes of the Bishops;
he has the right of being a persevering beggar. But
one hears less of conversions to the majority than of
men going over to the Opposition; and the effluences
from the Tomb of the Apostles close to the Council
Hall, of which such great expectations were formed,
seem to act in the opposite direction.
</p>

<p>
A new system of tactics has been for some time
adopted, in France principally, and is now to be introduced
into Germany. The clergy in the dioceses of
Opposition Bishops are to be seduced into signing
addresses expressing strongly their belief in papal infallibility
and desire for its speedy promulgation. This
device has been pursued with great success through
means of the Paris nunciature and the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>. The
French parish priests who, since the Concordat, have
been removeable at the will of the Bishops and have
<pb n='574'/><anchor id='Pg574'/>
suffered sufficiently from their arbitrary caprice in
transferring or depriving them, see their only resource in
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, and the notion has lately been disseminated
among them that the infallibilist dogma will procure
their complete emancipation from episcopal authority.
Accordingly almost every number of the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> contains
enthusiastic addresses, which might be tripled by
making all the nuns subscribe, as they would do with
the greatest pleasure.
</p>

<p>
The plan which has proved so successful in France
is to be adopted now in Germany also. The nuncio at
Munich reports that there is a swarm of red-hot infallibilists
there, and that the clergy are eagerly awaiting
the news of the definition; the diocesan organs of
Munich and Augsburg, together with the clerico-political
daily papers, are quoted as indubitable testimonies,
and the Bishops of Cologne, Augsburg, Munich,
Mayence, etc., are told on high authority that they have
nobody behind them, and that their claim to represent
the faith of their dioceses is in contradiction with facts.
There are indeed no numerously signed addresses to
show in Rome, but the daily papers give weighty
evidence. Silence, it is thought here, implies consent,
the women and the rustics are certainly for the Pope.
<pb n='575'/><anchor id='Pg575'/>
The Pope says in his supreme self-satisfaction, <q>Scio
omnia.</q> He knows the true state of things beyond the
Alps far better than the Bishops; the Jesuits and their
pupils and the nuncios take care of that. Hugo Grotius
says, with reference to Richelieu, <q>Butillerius Pater
et Josephus Capucinus negotia cruda accipiunt, cocta
ad Cardinalem deferunt.</q> So it is here, the Jesuits
do what the Fathers Boutillier and Joseph did in Paris.
Pius receives only what is <q>cooked,</q> and twice cooked,
first in the Cologne and Munich kitchen and then in
the Roman. The German Bishops remember with
some discomfort that they themselves sharply rejected
and censured every declaration of adhesion, and violently
suppressed the movement only just beginning.
</p>

<p>
The Cardinal General-Vicar has ordered public
prayers for a fortnight by the Pope's command: the
faithful are to invoke the Holy Ghost for the Council,
since the whole world presents so wretched an appearance
(<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>miserabile aspetto dell' orbe</foreign>), and the longer the
conflict (of the Council) with the world increases, the
more glorious will be the victory, and then, it is said,
will all nations behold miracles&mdash;which appears from
the context to mean that, considering the opposition of
the world (and of so many Bishops), the erection of the
<pb n='576'/><anchor id='Pg576'/>
new article of faith must be regarded as a miracle of
divine omnipotence, but a miracle which will certainly
be wrought. Many interpret this to mean that people
must be prepared for a conciliar <foreign rend='italic'>coup d'état</foreign>. But as
matters stand, it can hardly be supposed that the Court
party will let matters come to a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non placet</foreign> of at least
120 Bishops, nor would anything be gained by cutting
short the debate. In the last analysis the main ground
of the dogma with the majority always resolves itself
into this&mdash;that the present Pope and his predecessors
for many years past have held themselves infallible.
That is the only ground on which the Dominicans,
Jesuits and Cardinals have interpolated it into the
theology of the schools. Pius might certainly define
it in a Bull to the entire satisfaction of the majority,
and thereby put an end to the contention of the Bishops.
An end? it may be asked. Well, yes&mdash;the end of the
beginning.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='577'/><anchor id='Pg577'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-First Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 2, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The debate drags on its weary
length without any turning. Of real discussion there
is none, for very few of the prelates can speak in
Latin without preparation. As I have said before,
academical discourses are delivered, almost always without
any reference to what has immediately preceded.
Only the majority have the right of reply allowed them.
If a Bishop is attacked or calumniated, he cannot answer
till his turn comes, which is often not for some weeks,
as was Kenrick's case; and if he has spoken already,
he cannot speak again in the same debate, and cannot
therefore defend himself at all, as occurred with Hefele.
But the members of the Deputation can speak whenever
they choose; they interrupt the order and interpose
as often as seems necessary to them for defending their
proposals or weakening the force of an important speech
on the other side. Very often they break in on the
<pb n='578'/><anchor id='Pg578'/>
course of proceedings quite arbitrarily and without any
connection with previous speakers. They have the
stenographic reports before their eyes, and thus know
the exact words of the speaker and can answer them
while their opponents have no similar advantage. That
all this implies an iniquitous injustice and want of freedom
never occurs to the dominant party, who are on
the contrary astonished at the kindness and patience of
the Pope in allowing an opponent of his omnipotence
and advocate of doctrines long since condemned to
use St. Peter's as the theatre, and his Council as the
occasion, of a persevering attack on his dearest wishes,
ideas and acts. They ask themselves how long he will
tolerate so strange a reversal of his plans and views.
It is certain that his excitement has reached fever heat,
but it has not yet been resolved to break off the debate,
which is so far remarkable, inasmuch as according to the
opinion of the Court it can neither have any practical results
nor any character of sober reality. As they did not
regard it from the first as a means for establishing the
truth, it must now appear to them simply a hindrance in
the way of the truth already ascertained. For those who
attack infallibility, and thus utter error and blasphemy
over the tomb of the Apostles, freedom of speech can
<pb n='579'/><anchor id='Pg579'/>
be no right in the opinion of the majority, but simply a
favour dependent on the pleasure of the deeply injured
and offended chief. It is characteristic of the present
stage of the affair, that during this debate there has
been no disposition shown to interrupt the speakers of
the minority. Signs of discontent have been frequent
enough, but no further attempt to stop a speech by
force.
</p>

<p>
There is still an immense and unprofitable number of
speakers enrolled. Above a hundred have sent in their
names since the beginning, who might easily have been
debarred from doing so, and the tediousness of the discussion
is aggravated by the members of the Deputation,
who lengthen it out still further by their frequent and
usually prolix interpositions.
</p>

<p>
The chief events of the last fortnight have been the
speeches of Manning and Valerga for the dogma, and
of Ketteler, Conolly and Strossmayer against it. The
Bishop of Mayence spoke on Monday, May 23, when
he expressed his opinion more forcibly and gave more
offence than any previous speaker. He defended the constitution
of the Church against the Roman conspiracy,
citing the arguments contained in the pamphlet he
had before distributed, and denounced against ecclesiastical
<pb n='580'/><anchor id='Pg580'/>
centralization the same penalty of revolution,
incident to a centralized State, which, he said, is already
knocking at the doors. He gave his decisive adhesion
to those who demand unanimous consent, and declared
that he had always held the personal infallibility to be
<q>opinio probabilissima,</q> but could find no necessary
certainty in it, neither <q>certitudo dogmatica</q> nor <q>veritas
dogmatizanda.</q>
</p>

<p>
One might think that a man who is so unclear about
the logic of history and the principles of morals belongs
to the majority. However the impression produced
by Ketteler's speech was favourable to the minority,
and all who have watched his attitude before the
last four months, especially at Fulda, must have recognised
the decided advance in the line taken by the
Opposition. Many think the conversion is complete,
and the great wound of the Opposition&mdash;its containing
members ready sooner or later to turn renegades&mdash;finally
closed. The Bishop of Mayence was at first
believed to be the author of the pamphlet he has distributed,
but it was not composed under his eye or
under his influence, nor even at his suggestion, and
bears no trace of his mind. The general line is Maret's,
but his leading idea, that in case of a conflict a Council
<pb n='581'/><anchor id='Pg581'/>
is superior to a Pope, does not occur in it. Ketteler
must have acquired a great deal of Roman experience
and non-Roman development before he would denounce
a papal decree to his country and his diocese
as uncatholic. But the advance which he, like others,
and more than many others, has already made, is unquestionably
a gain, and gives a peculiar force to his
words. But it has damaged and discredited the minority
that so many Bishops are more careful about the position
and influence of the Church than about the purity
of doctrine.
</p>

<p>
I must return once more to Manning's speech of
May 25, as it was very interesting and important. He
asserted roundly that infallibility was already really a
doctrine of the Church, which could not be denied
without sin (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>sine publico peccato mortali</foreign>) or proximate
heresy (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>proximâ hæresi</foreign>), and therefore they did not
want to make a new dogma but simply to proclaim an
existing one. In these bold but highly significant
words Manning pointed to what many better men
choose to be blind to. He no longer acknowledges the
opponents of the doctrine as brothers in faith, as members
of one and the same Church, since they do not
satisfy his conditions of orthodoxy; his faith and theirs
<pb n='582'/><anchor id='Pg582'/>
are not the same. He has been the first to proclaim
this great truth in Council, and it is time for the minority
to ask themselves, whether unity still really
survives in the sense hitherto maintained against Protestants,
whether the foe is really still outside and
has not penetrated into the inmost sanctuary of the
Church, for the temple must be cleansed before the
nations are converted. The minority can no longer
live in peace with Manning and his like, or imagine
that the contest does not threaten the very existence of
the Church. Manning has indeed said that he does not
think the decree strong enough. The Spaniards agree
with him, and an open difference on this point has
arisen in the Deputation. The great majority would be
glad to find a formula less offensive to the Opposition,
but Manning has the Pope on his side, and gets him
worked upon by certain sacristan-like natures, like the
Bishops of Carcassonne and Belley, who have won the
special confidence of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> through having a certain
mental affinity with him. Manning's whole speech was
an attempt to hinder concessions, and keep the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
to the point of forcibly suppressing the minority. And
it counts also for a sign that the Pope is resolved to go
all lengths. The fanatics would prefer the Church
<pb n='583'/><anchor id='Pg583'/>
being exposed to the danger of schism to modifying
their theory in the least particular, for the latter would
be a humiliation for themselves, while the other kindles
a contest the end of which they feel no doubt about.
It is reckoned certain that of the Bishops who will
vote against the dogma, not all have the courage for a
protest, and that of those who do protest some will
rather resign their sees than undertake the contest
with the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> under excommunication.
</p>

<p>
Manning's argument for infallibility from the condition
of England was remarkable. It is unquestionably
his chief motive, and what gives the stamp of
sincerity to his position, to make Catholicism more
compact and closely united in Protestant England. He
hopes by means of the dogma to suppress those differences
of opinion which are a source of disturbance and
weakness, so that all will re-echo his words, uphold
his theology in the face of a disintegrating Protestantism,
and his policy in the face of political parties with
the combined strength of five million men. He conceives
that the Christian element is more and more disappearing
from the Established Church and the sects of England,
and sees a general dissolution of belief which
offers a future to Catholicism as the one definite
<pb n='584'/><anchor id='Pg584'/>
authority. But he maintained in the Council that the
English Catholics were in favour of infallibility, and that
even Protestants testified that it would strengthen his
hands. That the leading English theologian, Newman,
has spoken so strongly against the definition he of
course did not say. It was only consistent with the
bitter enmity between the two to ignore it. Nor did
he say that the English Bishops present at the Council
are equally divided&mdash;himself, Ullathorne, Chadwick
and Cornthwaite being infallibilists, against Errington,
Clifford, Amherst, and Vaughan, who are fallibilists.
He read extracts from Protestant papers, stating that
papal infallibility is the logical outcome of Catholicism;
to such miserable weapons was he driven for defending
his cause. Clifford, who followed him, had an easy
task in exposing these misrepresentations and falsehoods.
One point in his speech his hearers missed: he
said that the mischief the definition threatened the
Church and the mischief it had already done to the
interests of religion in England, might be gathered
from the letter of an illustrious English statesman, for
the authority of which he could appeal to an Archbishop
there present. This Archbishop was Manning
himself, and the allusion was to a letter addressed to
<pb n='585'/><anchor id='Pg585'/>
him by an English minister, saying in substance that in
England it was the most vehement Protestants, and
those most notorious for their hostility to the Catholic
Church, who eagerly desired to see infallibility and the
Syllabus made into dogmas, and that the present policy
of Rome had so greatly increased the anti-Catholic feeling
of the country that every step taken by the Government
to extend the rights of Catholics and improve the
social condition of Catholic Ireland met with the most
persistent opposition.
</p>

<p>
The Italian Valerga, titular Patriarch of Jerusalem,
delivered on Tuesday, May 31, a more spirited, piquant
and insolent speech, which I will give a report of in my
next letter.
</p>

<p>
The great debate may last till the middle of June,
when it is hoped that the chapter on the primacy may
be carried without difficulty, and the special debate on
infallibility be brought to a successful end before the
middle of July. But there is sure to be a lively and
protracted discussion on the primacy, which may easily
exhaust the patience of the majority, for the continuance
of the present situation is a deep humiliation for
the Pope and <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. The Opposition, whose existence
at first was so boldly denied, and of which there was
<pb n='586'/><anchor id='Pg586'/>
originally only a germ in the Episcopate, subsequently
developed in Council through the clumsy tactics of
Rome, places the Roman See in an unwonted and what
is thought an intolerable light. What Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> and the
Jesuits reckoned on accomplishing, first in three weeks,
then in four months, at Easter, at Pentecost, on the
feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, by acclamation, by
unanimous consent, is not done yet and seems to recede
further and further. The Roman people are losing their
reverence for the Pope, though they await the doctrine
with equanimity. They say, <q>Si cambia la Religione,</q>
and laugh good-humouredly. But I heard the words
from the mouth of a Roman priest, <q>L'idola restera al
Vaticano, ma l'altare serà deserto.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is certain attempts will soon be made either to cut
short the debate or adjourn it and overcome the opposition
by some compromise. Such an attempt was made
before by a Cardinal, but the Bishop of the minority to
whom he applied would not even look at the formula.
Then the Dominicans conceived a similar idea, but were
answered that there were strong reasons not only against
the wording of particular forms, but against any
reference to the question. Such proposals are sure to
be repeated in spite of Manning and the fanatics. But
<pb n='587'/><anchor id='Pg587'/>
the Opposition Bishops cannot entertain them separately
without breach of word to their colleagues, though it is
always possible that some formula or other may find
friends and advocates among them.
</p>

<p>
The rupture with France is a decisive one. In the
first place a Bishop from the North of France has
repeated here a conversation he had with a leading
statesman in Paris, who said that the attitude of Rome
was equivalent to a declaration of war against France,
and that the Government had done everything to withhold
the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> from its perilous course, but in vain.
He himself opposed Count Daru's policy, as he did not
wish to prevent what might lead to the separation of
Church and State, but now he thought they were free
to carry out the separation, as Rome had made it inevitable.
The reciprocal obligations of the two Courts
would cease, and therefore the occupation of the Roman
States by French troops, for the spiritual power the
Pope was aiming at was incompatible with secular
power. At the same time the French ambassador
uttered similar warnings here, and informed the Cardinal
Secretary of State that he was ordered to do nothing
more to restrain the course of events. Antonelli
is said to have replied that he took the same view, but
<pb n='588'/><anchor id='Pg588'/>
had not influence enough to do anything. It is of
course believed here that the present administration in
Paris is not strong or firm enough to carry out a policy
which would be more after the mind of Prince Napoleon
than of the Emperor. But the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> underrates the
offence given to France by the quiet contempt with
which both Daru's notes were treated.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the incense is being constantly swung
before Pius, so that the clouds of homage conceal the
abyss to which he is drawing on the Church. There is
great agitation going on among the French as well as
the Italian clergy, with a view to securing their votes
for infallibility and also presents of money. Their expressions
not seldom exceed in devotion to Pius everything
of the kind ever heard of before; and it seems
as if the old canon law sycophants had come back to
life, who made no scruple of designating the Pope God
and Vice-God. Let us give two examples. One of
these true sons of the Church in Italy submits by
anticipation to whatever Pius chooses to define, whether
with the approval of the Council or by his own sole
authority. Seven priests from Cuneo bring these verses&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Parla, O Gran Pio,</l>
<l>Cio che sona il tuo labbro,</l>
<l>Non è voce mortal, voce è di Dio.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='589'/><anchor id='Pg589'/>

<p>
The international Committee of the minority thought
it necessary that a treatise should be expressly composed
to discuss the weighty question of moral unanimity
being required for dogmatic decrees, and Dupanloup
has undertaken the task. He had a pamphlet on the
subject printed at Naples and laid before the Fathers.
He first proves from history that this condition was never
wanting in any Councils which count as œcumenical,
and was distinctly recognised and maintained at Trent
by the Pope himself. He then examines the opinions
of the chief theologians of all ages, including St. Vincent
of Lerins and St. Augustine, and Popes Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi>,
Vigilius and Gregory the Great, who all agree in making
moral unanimity an indispensable condition for a
decree on faith. He proceeds to observe that in matters
of discipline and canon law a numerical majority is
enough, as decisions of that kind may be altered afterwards,
but for a dogma there must be moral unanimity
of the Council and the Churches to whose faith it bears
witness, or else Catholicism would be annihilated.
But great theologians and theological schools of former
ages opposed papal infallibility, and it is opposed now
by a large number of Bishops at the Vatican Council
representing great Churches and Catholic nations. A
<pb n='590'/><anchor id='Pg590'/>
Council is only then infallible when the assembled
Bishops of the whole Church bear witness to the faith
inherited from the beginning. The majority must
therefore either convert the minority to their views by
free discussion or give up their design; were they to
suppress the minority by mere brute force of numbers,
that would be unconciliar and unprecedented in Church
history. It is not mere probability but unquestionable
certainty that is required for defining a dogma, and a
considerable number of distinguished members of the
Council have no such firm belief in papal infallibility.
To define it in spite of this would be to act as judges
and masters of faith, not as its depositaries and witnesses.
A minority denying a dogma which had been
the perpetual belief of the Church would be in the
wrong, but not a minority repudiating the definition of
a doctrine which had never been held an article of
faith. Even the Pope cannot by his authority raise
the decision of a mere majority to the dignity of a
dogma, for he only promulgates decrees on faith <q>sacro
approbante Concilio,</q> and without moral unanimity the
Council has not approved. The words of the Bishop of
Orleans are directed principally against the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>,
which has notoriously laboured to establish the opposite
<pb n='591'/><anchor id='Pg591'/>
hypothesis, and he asks, <q>Are we at a Council or not?
If we are, the rules of Councils must be observed, or else
a great assembly of Bishops is reduced simply to playing
the part of a theatrical exhibition.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dupanloup goes on to remark on the storms and incalculable
evils which the definition of papal infallibility
would bring on the Church and the Papacy. He
concludes with these words: <q>If ever moral unanimity
was requisite for a dogmatic decision, it is so at a Council
like the Vatican, where there are 276 Italian Bishops,
of whom 143 belong to the States of the Church;
43 Cardinals, of whom 23 are not Bishops or have no
Sees; 120 Archbishops or Bishops <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, and 51
Abbots or Generals of Orders&mdash;while the Bishops present
from all Catholic countries of Europe, exclusive of
Italy, only number 265, so that the Patriarchs, Primates,
Archbishops, and diocesan Bishops of the whole world
are outnumbered by the diocesan Bishops of Italy
alone.<note place='foot'>He should have said <q>the Italian prelates.</q></note> At a Council so composed a mere majority can
never decide; and the less so when the personal intervention
of the Pope makes itself felt, when the freedom
of the Bishops is so seriously hampered, and in so many
ways, when the question of infallibility has been so
<pb n='592'/><anchor id='Pg592'/>
unscrupulously and violently brought forward for discussion
by a mere sovereign act&mdash;a sort of <foreign rend='italic'>coup d'état</foreign>&mdash;when
consciences are tormented and a number of writings
are issued which have created a great sensation
and give evidence of the anxiety of the faithful, and
when lastly the Bishops themselves let a cry escape
from their tortured hearts which the whole press re-echoes.
Under such circumstances it is impossible to
settle the matter by a mere <foreign rend='italic'>coup</foreign> of the majority; and
if it is done all kinds of mischief must be feared. Nor
is it I alone who say so; there are 100 Bishops who
say, <q>An intolerable burden would be laid on our consciences.
We should fear that the œcumenical character
of the Council would be called in question, and
abundant materials supplied to the enemies of religion
for assailing the Holy See and the Council, and that it
would be without authority in the eyes of the Christian
world, as having been no true and no free Council.
And in these troubled times no greater evil can well
be conceived.</q></q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='593'/><anchor id='Pg593'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Letter_LII'/>
<head>Fifty-Second Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 3, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Valerga attacked the <q>Gallicans,</q>
drawing a parallel between the Pope and Christ,
and between the Fallibilists and Monothelites. As in
Christ the human will co-existed with the divine, so in
the Pope may personal infallibility co-exist with moral
sinfulness, and to conclude from the former against the
latter&mdash;to draw an argument from scandals in papal
history against the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>privilegium inerrantiæ</foreign>&mdash;is analogous
to the error of the Monothelites, who denied the
possibility of a human will subject to sin co-existing
with the divine will in the same person. Never has
the well-known spirit of the Roman <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> shown itself
so openly and with such technical adroitness as in this
carefully elaborated and minute accusation against the
Opposition. As Archbishop Purcell of Cincinnati
expressed it, it was <q>exemplum sophismatum artis ad
instar congestorum,</q> and great expectations might be
<pb n='594'/><anchor id='Pg594'/>
formed of its salutary effect on the French. Purcell
answered shortly and pointedly that the charge applied
equally to the Council of Trent and the sixth, seventh,
and eighth Œcumenical Councils, and that he and his
colleagues were content to endure the patriarch's anathema
in such good company. Even Bellarmine quotes
a whole cloud of witnesses against infallibilism, and
neither he nor later writers had refuted them. It is a
matter of thankfulness to God that he has never
suffered this opinion to gain dogmatic authority. Purcell
then cited clenching proofs of the public erroneous
teaching of Popes, and among them the history of the
ordinations and reordinations of Formosus and Sergius.
The standpoint which he took as a republican was interesting.
He said that the Church was the freest society
in the world, and was loved as such by its American sons,
for the Americans abhorred every doctrine opposed to
civil and spiritual freedom. As kings existed for the good
of the peoples, so Popes for the good of the Church, and
not <foreign rend='italic'>vice versâ</foreign>. Perhaps he was thinking of the words
of the absolutist Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>, <q>La nation ne fait pas
corps en France, elle réside tout entière dans la personne
du roi.</q> For <q>nation</q> put <q>Église,</q> and the
words describe precisely the papal system, as it is now
<pb n='595'/><anchor id='Pg595'/>
intended to be made exclusively dominant by means
of the Council.
</p>

<p>
The most important speech in this sitting, and one
of the most remarkable theologically since the opening
of the Council, was that of Conolly, Archbishop of
Halifax. Formerly an unhesitating adherent of personal
infallibility he had come here without having
specially studied the question, and under the full belief
that the <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Zeitung</hi> had calumniated the
Roman See in representing this dogma as the real
object of the Council. But when he found what was
expected of him here, he instituted a searching examination,
and thoroughly sifted, as he said, what the
classical Roman theologians cite for their favourite
doctrine. He now frankly submitted to the Council
the result of his studies,&mdash;that the whole of Christian
antiquity explains the stock passages of Scripture
alleged for papal infallibility in a different sense from
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and bears witness against the theory that
the Pope alone, without the Bishops or even in opposition
to them (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>etiam omnibus invitis et contradicentibus</foreign>),
is infallible. But what our Lord has not spoken, even
though it was certain metaphysically or physically, can
never become the basis of an article of faith, for faith
<pb n='596'/><anchor id='Pg596'/>
comes by hearing, and hearing is not by science, but
by the words of Christ. It is the speciality of Catholicism
not to interpret passages of Scripture singly and
by mere critical exegesis, but in the light of tradition
and in harmony with the Fathers. To found a dogma
on the rejection of the traditional interpretation would
be pure Protestantism. It is not therefore the words of
Scripture simply but the true sense, as revealed by God
and attested by the perpetual and unanimous consent
of the Fathers, which all are pledged by oath to follow,
that must be called the real revelation of God. To cite
modern theologians, as Bellarmine does, is nothing to the
purpose. I will have nothing, he said, but the indubitable
word of God made into a dogma. The opinions
of 10,000 theologians do not suffice me. And no theologian
should be quoted who lived after the Isidorian
forgeries. But no single passage of Fathers or Councils
can be quoted from that earlier time of genuine tradition,
which affirms the Pope's dogmatic independence
of the rest of the Episcopate. If there be any such, let
it be shown; but there is none, and innumerable and
conclusive testimonies can be cited on the other side.
Even at the Apostolic Council at Jerusalem St. James
proved the teaching of Peter by the Prophets, and
<pb n='597'/><anchor id='Pg597'/>
appealed to it because it agreed with theirs and not on
account of his authority. Conolly was ready for his part
to believe that no Pope could wilfully and knowingly
become heretical,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, persistently hold out against all
the rest of the Church; but that did not prove papal
infallibility, and to define it would be to bring the
Vatican Council into contradiction with the three
Councils which condemned Honorius, to narrow the
gates of heaven, repel the East, and proclaim not peace
but war. To those who said, <q>Pereant populi sed promulgetur
dogma,</q> Conolly replied that the loss of one
soul was serious enough to outweigh all the advantages
looked for from the new dogma. He declared, against
Manning, that no one was justified in calling an opinion
<q>proximate heresy</q> which the Church had not condemned
as such; for it was a duty to follow and not to anticipate
her sentence. A Pope had said that no one should
censure a doctrine before the Holy See had spoken, and
the Penitentiary had declared in 1831 that the Gallican
Articles were not under any censure. He had worked
thirty-three years among Protestants, and could testify
that what Manning affirmed was the reverse of the
truth.
</p>

<p>
Conolly is a man who is on the whole in tolerable
<pb n='598'/><anchor id='Pg598'/>
harmony with Roman views, but who is therefore all the
more resolved to vote against infallibility. While he forbids
the Gallican doctrine being taught in his diocese, he
protests here against the Roman. There is evidently a
process going on in his mind, which in so cultivated
a theologian can have but one result. He ended by
declaring that he would accept the definition if the
Council proclaimed it, for he was convinced that God
was among them. But that merely meant that he was
convinced the dogma would never be proclaimed. On
the strength of that conviction he was almost the first
speaker who briefly but decisively maintained the
doctrine to be untenable.
</p>

<p>
Yesterday, Thursday, Vancsa, Bishop of Fogarasch, of
the Greek Rite, quoted the testimonies of Greek Fathers
against infallibility, and his speech was thought a remarkable
one. Dreux-Brézé of Moulins followed him,
and again had the misfortune immediately to precede
Strossmayer. He contended that, as the Pope is
supreme teacher, and the French call him <q>Souverain
Pontife,</q> and he is the highest judge, he must be infallible.
As Vicar of Christ, he is also king, for Christ
said to Pilate, <q>Thou rightly callest me king,</q> and the
royal title was affixed to the cross. But if Christ was
<pb n='599'/><anchor id='Pg599'/>
infallible as king, so is the Pope. He supported all this
by texts of Scripture, and spoke against the Fathers
who accused the Pope of despotism or maintained that
the new dogma would be the formal introduction of the
grossest despotism. Without the Pope, who is <q>Episcopus
universalis,</q> and can seldom exercise his office on
account of the number of the faithful and of his labours,
the Bishops have no jurisdiction, and cannot even
absolve without powers derived from him. <q>Let us
therefore go on,</q> he concluded, <q>to unity and agreement,
and give Cæsar what belongs to Cæsar, and the Pope
what belongs to the Pope.</q>
</p>

<p>
Strossmayer followed him, and declared that papal
infallibility was against the constitution of the Church,
the rights of the Bishops and Councils, and the immutable
rule of faith. He explained the constitution of
the Church according to the holy Fathers and especially
St. Cyprian (<hi rend='italic'>De Unitate Ecclesiæ</hi>), who did not hold
their jurisdiction to be limited to their dioceses, since
by virtue of their character they often had to exercise
authority in the concerns of the universal Church, and
were obliged to do so, as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, in Councils. This sharing
of authority and rights between the Pope and the Episcopate
was evident from the controversy between Pope
<pb n='600'/><anchor id='Pg600'/>
Stephen and Cyprian in the third century about the
rebaptism of heretics, in which the latter did not the
least admit any personal and absolute infallibility
bestowed on the Pope by our Lord. And St. Augustine
defended him on the ground that the question had
not yet been decided by a General Council, which shows
that the sole authority in matters of faith and morals
was in his opinion a General Council, united with its
head.
</p>

<p>
Strossmayer took this opportunity of vindicating the
French Church admirably from the calumnies and
attacks of the Patriarch of Jerusalem. He complained
indignantly of a Church which had come forth pure and
victorious from the bitterest persecution, and which
boasted such great martyrs and confessors, being slandered
by the comparison of so-called Gallicanism to
Monothelitism, and of those great men being libelled
who during life had rendered such conspicuous services
to the Church of God, as well as their successors who
had made wonderful and exceptional sacrifices for
the Church and the Holy See. Strossmayer blamed
the Patriarch's vague and general statements about the
constitution of the Church, and advised him to bring
arguments from positive tradition, which were alone of
<pb n='601'/><anchor id='Pg601'/>
any decisive force. He proceeded to insist on the
power and necessity of General Councils, especially in
our days, and he proved the necessity of their being
frequently held from the conduct of the Apostles, from
the holy Fathers, and from the Councils of Constance
and Trent. But if once the personal infallibility of the
Pope were defined, Councils would become superfluous
and useless, and the Bishops would be robbed of their
authority as witnesses and judges of faith. In the one
way the greatest injury would be done to the prosperity
of the Church, and in the other the rights of
Bishops would be reduced to a mere assent, so that
they would hardly any longer be consultors and theologians;
but this would be clearly against the unchangeable
constitution of the Church and the usage
of Councils, as for instance that of Chalcedon, where
the Bishops most unmistakeably exercised the office
of judges as regarded the Letter of Pope Leo. The
Bishops could make no such concession without betraying
their authority, and casting a slur on their predecessors
at the Council of Trent, who are well known to
have so emphatically vindicated their freedom and
rights, when the two words <q>proponentibus Legatis</q>
were inserted by the Legates against their will. And
<pb n='602'/><anchor id='Pg602'/>
the speaker praised the wisdom of the Council of Trent
in resolving to abstain from deciding any questions
which might give occasion for discord or for prejudicing
the rights and freedom of the Bishops.
</p>

<p>
In the last part of his speech Strossmayer discussed
the Catholic rule of faith, which had been completely
changed and violated by the comments of the members
of the Deputation of Faith on the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. The principle
of at least moral unanimity was, he said, a sacred
one, corresponding to precedent and pleasing to the faithful.
There were whole volumes of the holy Fathers extant
on this principle, as of Irenæus, Tertullian, Augustine
and Vincent of Lerins, who in common with all others
maintained that there are three essential conditions for
proving a divine tradition and propounding an article of
faith, antiquity, universality and agreement. They all
thought the tradition of the Roman Church a principal
river, whereby the whole earth was watered, but they
regarded the traditions of the other Churches also as
tributaries by which the river must be constantly fed,
or it would in course of time be dried up. They all
ascribed the first authority to the witness of St. Peter's
successor, but that authority was only manifested
clearly to the Catholic world after being reinforced by
<pb n='603'/><anchor id='Pg603'/>
the consent of all the other Churches. This divine
rule would be completely overset by the personal infallibility
of the Pope, to the great injury of faith. If it
is said that the definition is earnestly desired by many,
it must be replied that it is also desired by the worst
enemies of the Church, who openly say in writing and
by word of mouth that it is the best means for destroying
the infallibility of the Church. That fact alone would
explain the alarm and anxiety of so many of the most
learned Fathers of the Council. Strossmayer dwelt in
conclusion on the danger that would result from the
definition for the Southern Sclaves and Catholic Croats,
who lived side by side with eight million persons out of
the unity of the Church. Not only would the return
of these separated brethren be barred, but it might be
feared that the Catholic Croats would be driven out of the
Church. He therefore always hoped, and entreated the
holy Father, that he would emulate the example of the
humility of St. Peter in his martyrdom, and of Christ
who was exalted by his Father because He had humbled
Himself to the death of the Cross, and magnanimously
have the subject withdrawn.
</p>

<p>
The speech was listened to with great attention, and
became the topic of conversation in all circles at Rome,
<pb n='604'/><anchor id='Pg604'/>
and even Bishops of the other party paid a high tribute
to it. As yet 24 Bishops have spoken against the
dogma and 35 for it,&mdash;most of the latter having no real
dioceses.
</p>

<p>
Two interesting episodes have intervened. Last week
the police refused the Prince Bishop of Breslau his <foreign rend='italic'>visa</foreign>
for Naples, because he could show no permission from
the Presidents of the Council to go there. This implied
that the Fathers are civil as well as spiritual subjects of
the Pope. The Bishop, who was wearied out with the
objectless proceedings in the Council Hall, sent to
Fessler, the Secretary of the Council, for the requisite
permission; Fessler replied that he could not give it,
and referred him to the President de Angelis, who tried
to represent the whole affair as a mistake. It had not
been so ill meant, and at most only the departure of the
Orientals was intended to be prevented, he said, and
he authorized Fessler to instruct the police to give
the permission. But that was the most complete indorsing
of what they had done, and proved that the
Pope meant to use his temporal power for managing
the Council and controlling the actions of the Fathers.
On that account the departure of the Prince Bishop
had been hindered, and the whole affair involves the
<pb n='605'/><anchor id='Pg605'/>
question of ecclesiastical freedom and international
right. Does a member of the Council thereby lose or
prejudice his rights as the subject of a foreign state, or
is the freedom of individual Bishops suspended while
taking part in it? So anxious is the Pope to give up
nothing which may serve for dominating the Council,
that he restricts the Bishops in the most harmless
exercise of personal freedom, which at other times he
would never have thought of. I will not dwell on the
insult in this procedure to the King of Prussia, whose
safe-conduct was no more respected than the Emperor
Sigismund's at Constance, for a graver question is at
stake,&mdash;that of international right and freedom of the
Council. Meanwhile they reckon on Prussia taking no
further notice of the affair, and the Prince Bishop has
given up his journey after these difficulties. France,
too, has quietly endured a series of insults, and so they
hope not to have to abolish the regulation or disavow
the police.
</p>

<p>
Rome cannot admit the principle of international
right in this case, without giving up one of her own
principles, the Inquisition, according to whose laws
foreigners can be arrested, imprisoned, and put to the
question. No secular tribunal limits its power, and
<pb n='606'/><anchor id='Pg606'/>
every Bishop therefore could in theory be brought
before it. By papal law the Pope might at any moment
have Cardinal Schwarzenberg arrested, and if the right
has become inapplicable, that is due to the influence of
foreign states and the modern spirit, whose restraints
on the full exercise of Church authority it is the office
of the Council to remove, as the Syllabus, Bull of
Censures, <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi>, etc., prove. According
to Roman canon law, freedom at the Council is inconceivable.
</p>

<p>
In a former letter I gave an inaccurate account of the
Prince Bishop's conduct towards the priest Jentsch, at
Liegnitz, being misled by statements in the Roman
newspapers.<note place='foot'>Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supr.</hi> p. <ref target='Pg517'>517</ref>.</note> The text of the explanation accepted by
the Bishop shows that no principle was conceded or
denied, and he said himself that he agreed in substance
with Jentsch.
</p>

<p>
The arrival of Father Hötzl in Rome seemed for a
time likely to produce still more serious conflicts, for
his affair looked as if it would oblige the minority to
give expression to their view of Döllinger's teaching on
the necessity of general consent for the œcumenicity
of a Council. Those who had undertaken the instruction
<pb n='607'/><anchor id='Pg607'/>
of Hötzl cared less for converting him
than for using the opportunity to provoke dissension
among the minority. He was told that an explanation,
not a retractation, was all that was demanded
of him, and when the explanation he offered was found
unsatisfactory another was proposed to him on May 31.
The crucial passage in it was read and examined by
leading bishops of the minority, whose names were calculated
to inspire complete confidence. Hötzl had
some cause to think he had saved honour and conscience,
and responsibility to man and God, when he
sought the judgment of liberal German Bishops and
resolved to abide by it. But though they disliked the
passage, they thought it difficult to know how to save a
man who had come to Rome in such childish confidence,
and did not feel justified under the circumstances in
urging him to go to extremities and sacrifice himself to
their interests. It was not their place to drive him to
a breach with his Order or a loss of personal liberty, at
a time when they had not themselves publicly, solemnly
and decisively repudiated the doctrine imposed on him.
Still less did they want to compromise themselves or
break up their harmony before the time. And their
hesitation may have led Father Hötzl into his mistake;
<pb n='608'/><anchor id='Pg608'/>
he was acting in concert with the minority when he
signed.
</p>

<p>
I give only a brief preliminary notice of the most
important points in to-day's sitting. After Dinkel, who
spoke very well, and Domenec, Bishop of Pittsburg,
who was much interrupted, Maret made a longer
speech, which he delivered in a very loud voice, as deaf
persons are apt to do. In the course of it he declared
that it would be called a vicious circle for the less to
give power to the greater, as would be done if the
Council, which was said to possess a lower authority,
were to confer on the Pope&mdash;a higher authority&mdash;the
prerogative of infallibility. Thereupon Bilio struck in
very excitedly, crying out <q>Concilium nihil dat Papæ
nec dare potest, sed solummodo recognoscit, suffragia
dat, et Sanctus Pater quod in Spiritu Sancto ipsi placet
decidit.</q>
</p>

<p>
In yesterday's sitting a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>postulatum</foreign> for the close of
the general debate was prepared, which is said to have
received 150 signatures. After Maret's speech it was
at once produced and the close voted. Little more
than 60 prelates have spoken, and above 40 were waiting
their turn, amongst whom were Haynald and other
considerable persons. The continuation of the debate
<pb n='609'/><anchor id='Pg609'/>
had been reckoned upon and much was hoped from it;
but now that the example has once been set of using
the well-known clause in the order of business in the
interests of one party, the step may be repeated in
every succeeding debate. The Opposition will be
driven into greater firmness by this occurrence, which
they had foreshadowed in the half-threatening formula
at the end of their great Protest. The question is now
forced upon them, whether they were in earnest in
what they then said.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='610'/><anchor id='Pg610'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-Third Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 4, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The first impression made on
the minority by the violent closing of the general
debate led many of them, in discussing it directly after
the sitting, to say they would take no further part in
the debates. A great meeting was arranged for to-day
at Cardinal Rauscher's to decide the question. It was
the largest international gathering of the Opposition
yet held, including nearly 80 Bishops, but was for that
very reason difficult to manage. Two possible courses
were discussed&mdash;to remain in Rome but take no further
part in the debates, as not being free, and vote at the
end <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non placet</foreign> against the infallibilist <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, or simply
to issue a protest against the injustice they had suffered,
and continue to take part in the proceedings. The
former view was supported principally by the Hungarians,
North Americans, the leading French Bishops,
and men like Strossmayer, Simor, Haynald, Darboy,
<pb n='611'/><anchor id='Pg611'/>
Dupanloup, Clifford, Conolly (represented by proxy),
and others. They insisted that words were of no further
avail, and they should show their sense of the want of
freedom by acts, so that, as far as in them lay, no
decree should be carried which had not been thoroughly
discussed. In this way the œcumenicity of the Council
would be denied without coming as yet to a breach
in Council or a disturbance in the Church; for they
could no longer recognise the Council as legitimate,
nor yet retire, for to retire would precipitate the most
extravagant decisions and lead to an open conflict.
There were many reasons why it could no longer be
held legitimate, such as its composition, the order of
business, the pressure exercised on the Bishops by the
Pope personally or through his officials, the notorious
design of getting dogmas promulgated by a majority,
etc. It would be simply a degradation to give in any
longer to such a farce. In Parliaments speeches were
not altogether useless, for if they could not influence
votes they enlightened public opinion, but at this
so-called Council most of their hearers were quite
incapable from their standard of cultivation of appreciating
theological arguments, not to add that the moral
standard of many among them was such that, even if
<pb n='612'/><anchor id='Pg612'/>
they were convinced, they would not act on their convictions.
And speeches, which were not made public,
could produce no effect out of doors. To debate under
these circumstances would only be to incur a large
responsibility for the entire conduct of the Council.
But if the Opposition refrained from discussion and
left the field free to the majority, the differences among
them would soon be made manifest. The <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> could
hardly hold out against so serious a demonstration, but
if it remained obstinate, no further doubt would be
possible in the Church as to the opinion of the minority
about the Council.
</p>

<p>
On the other side it was urged that all which could
be gained by such a demonstration would be gained
equally by a declaration showing how the forcible closing
of the general debate had undermined the foundations
and future authority of the Council. They owed
it to the world to do more than merely give reasons
against the legitimacy of the Council; they must
debate and bring forward the objections to the infallibilist
doctrine itself, and thus give public testimony of
their convictions. Most of the Germans took this view,
which many French Bishops readily acceded to, when
they observed that the Hungarian phalanx had been
<pb n='613'/><anchor id='Pg613'/>
broken up. Perhaps other and more subordinate motives
helped to establish this opinion, but many of its
advocates are men of no decided resolution, and men
who in reality want only a semblance of resistance and
are already secretly prepared to yield at the last
moment. It was thought strange that at this assembly,
which had been summoned to consult on the means of
meeting the violent <foreign rend='italic'>coup</foreign> of the majority, a German
Archbishop was present who had joined the enemies
of his party in subscribing the proposal for closing the
debate the day before.
</p>

<p>
The draft of the Protest finally adopted against this
act of violence had been brought to the meeting by
Cardinal Rauscher, and bears marks of the antagonistic
elements it combines. Yet it contains one passage,
which may perhaps be appealed to hereafter,
<q>Protestamur contra violationem nostri juris.</q><note place='foot'>It will be seen from the protest afterwards published that this passage
was greatly toned down.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='614'/><anchor id='Pg614'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-Fourth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 6, 1870.</hi>&mdash;There have been indications
for some time past that the <foreign rend='italic'>dénouement</foreign> was likely to be
precipitated. The Pope himself declared that it was
impossible to keep the Bishops here in July. The
great debate, with 106 speakers inscribed, wearied every
one, and the tropical heat increases the exhaustion and
disgust. But the minority maintained their resolve to
carry on the general debate to the end, while the
majority counted on its absorbing the discussion of the
separate chapters of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and accordingly Fessler
announced that the speakers were at liberty to treat of
points which belonged properly to the special debate.
His party considered that, if the general and special
debate were mixed up in this way, they might insist at
the end that the separate chapters required no further
discussion, since everything had been said already, and
so they might come sooner to the decision they so
earnestly desired. Very few speakers have attempted
<pb n='615'/><anchor id='Pg615'/>
any theological argument&mdash;perhaps only Conolly, Dinkel
and Maret; and this made it easier to mix up the
general and special discussion, which again has helped
to give a vague and rambling character to the debate.
It was clear that after 106 or more speeches on the
preliminary question, there were still five weary debates
to come on the preamble and each of the four chapters,
so that, unless the discussion was to be forcibly closed,
it must either last on through the whole summer, or a
prorogation be allowed while the main question was
still unsettled. The first expedient seemed hardly practicable,
and could only be held out <foreign rend='italic'>in terrorem</foreign>, so that
the Court really had to choose between an act of arbitrary
power or a prorogation of the Council, which last
would be equivalent to a great victory of the minority.
There was no want of attempts to get up an agitation
for an adjournment. It seemed a happy escape from
grave embarrassments to those secular and untheological
counsellors of the Pope, who have given up the notion
of infallibility, and on the contrary are convinced that
the definition involves the separation of Church and
State, the fall of the temporal power and the loss of
the accustomed resources of the Papacy. These men
do not expect an isle of Delos to rise out of the sea for
<pb n='616'/><anchor id='Pg616'/>
the Pope when the States of the Church are swallowed
up, but they are excluded from any influence on the
Council. The more full the Pope is of the one grand
subject of his infallibility, the less will he listen to
Antonelli, to whom the mysteries in which he is not
initiated are a nuisance, and who hates the line taken
by Manning and the French zealots and apostolic Janissaries,
and would like nothing better than an ambiguous
formula leaving things just where they are.
</p>

<p>
But as soon as the majority became aware that some
of the more colourless Bishops of the middle party
were working for the prorogation of the Council, they
resolved to be beforehand with them. Their <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>postulatum</foreign>
for closing the debate with its 150 signatures was
got ready on Thursday the 2d, but was not meant to be
presented till the Saturday. But the great excitement
at the close of Maret's speech gave them the opportunity
for striking the blow on Friday, when the close of the
general debate was carried by a large majority. The
order of business undoubtedly gave the Presidents the
right of putting it to the vote, and moreover they have
more than the letter of the law on their side. They
might have urged that, as the general and special
debates were not kept separate, most of what was now
<pb n='617'/><anchor id='Pg617'/>
omitted might be supplied afterwards, and the Fathers
who had missed their turn would have five other
opportunities of speaking. They might have also
alleged, in excuse of hurrying the proceedings, the
constantly growing impatience and disgust generally
manifested in the assembly, and the uselessness of all
minute discussion of details. It is enough to mention
as indicative of the prevalent feeling of the majority,
that they received the Bishop of Pittsburg with derisive
laughter when he ascended the tribune, and that they
muttered at every affectionate or respectful allusion to
the Pope by an Opposition speaker, <q>Et osculatus est
Illum.</q><note place='foot'>Matt. xxvi. 49.</note> Under these circumstances Conolly omitted
nearly half his manuscript. The majority might have
urged the further excuse that far more of their own
speakers than of their opponents were excluded by the
close of the debate. Some 27 of the latter had as yet
spoken against 36 infallibilists, which however, considering
that the minority are only a fourth of the
Council, tells in their favour.
</p>

<p>
But if we examine the matter more closely, the Opposition
has lost all it had left by the close of the general
debate, viz., freedom of speech. It has been sacrificed
<pb n='618'/><anchor id='Pg618'/>
to the caprice of the majority, for the subsequent
debates may be closed in the same way: that on the
primacy because it is no new subject, and that on infallibility
because the general debate turned wholly
upon it. So the Opposition had nothing left them but
to protest, unless they would summon courage for a
decisive act. But their protest is as feeble as the last;
it is simply directed against the abuse of an order of
business they had already protested against, and then
themselves accepted by continuing to take part in the
Council. A party intoxicated with success cannot be
restrained or conquered by these paper demonstrations,
nor even the sympathy of the Catholic world be
gained; a definite and firm principle is requisite for
that. After all their experiences it may be called a
harmless amusement for the minority to present protest
after protest, with the certainty that they will be laid
by unnoticed and unanswered.
</p>

<p>
The French Bishops of the minority held a meeting
on the 3rd, from which they came away troubled and
undecided. The Germans take the matter less seriously.
Their past presses heavily upon them. They had an
opportunity, when the second <foreign rend='italic'>regolamento</foreign> was issued at
the end of February, and again at the Solemn Session
<pb n='619'/><anchor id='Pg619'/>
at the end of April, of either getting their views accepted
or bringing the Council to an end. But they
were not then strong enough for that. Now at the
eleventh hour a last though less favourable opportunity
is offered them. But at the international meeting at
Cardinal Rauscher's last Saturday, their views were
again set aside, for the assemblage of the whole body of
Opposition Bishops brought to light the unpleasant
fact of a gulf between the intellectual leaders and the
mass of the minority, which makes any real leadership
impossible. And this is the more lamentable, because
the men who since the opening of the Council have
risen to so important a position were almost unanimous;
for Hefele and Rivet, Bishop of Dijon, were almost the
only ones among them, except Ketteler, who rejected
the energetic measure of holding aloof from the debates
for the future and protesting by silence. It seems that
Hefele wanted to recognise the Council as still having
some claim. The other leaders succumbed, unwillingly
and predicting evils, to the will of the majority, who
were satisfied with the protest drawn up by Rauscher.
</p>

<p>
But all is not yet lost, and the tactics actually adopted
may perhaps in skilful hands be made as effective as
the rejected policy. Between Pentecost and the feast
<pb n='620'/><anchor id='Pg620'/>
of the Apostles from 80 to 90 speakers might make
their voices heard. If we consider that more than 100
speakers had enrolled their names for the first and
tolerably irregular debate, and that 49 speeches were
suppressed, it is clear that the great question of the
primacy and infallibility of the Pope would require a
much longer time for uninterrupted and complete discussion,
and thus the adjournment would remain as
probable and as inevitable as before. The Court and
the majority would perhaps shrink from depriving the
proceedings of all dignity, weight and completeness by
a fresh <foreign rend='italic'>coup d'église</foreign>, as such an attempt might appear
even to them too bold and dangerous in the special
debate on the principles of the Church. And if such
an attempt was made, it would perhaps exhaust at last
even the patience of the patient Germans, and lead
them to muster all their forces for the last contest.
One must admit that if orthodox Catholicism is only
to be saved by an adjournment of the Council this is
not much to the credit of the Church. But the reason
why so many prefer a prorogation to a decisive conflict
is because they fear that many present opponents of the
doctrine might at last vote for its definition and betray
their consciences through fear of men, and that many
<pb n='621'/><anchor id='Pg621'/>
who vote against it and insist on the necessity of
unanimity would ultimately accept and teach a dogma
false in itself and carried by illegitimate means.
</p>

<p>
I will merely mention, in illustration of this, that
it was lately thought very necessary to distribute a
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Disquisitio Moralis de Officio Episcoporum</foreign>, discussing
whether a Bishop does not greatly violate his conscience
by voting for a decree to define the personal and independent
infallibility of the Pope, without having any
previous conviction of its being a revealed doctrine
always held and handed down in the Church as such.
The treatise is well written, but no such bitter irony
against the Episcopate is contained in the pasquinades,
and it is obvious that the author has not underrated
their weakness from the fact that many Bishops
would vote differently if the voting was secret. There
are some among them too who doubt if papal absolutism
and a power which kills out all intellectual movement
is not better than truth and purity of doctrine, and if
the responsibility of individual Bishops is not superseded
by a decree of the Pope, at least when issued
<q>sacro approbante Concilio.</q>
</p>

<p>
To judge from to-day's debate on the preamble, one
would imagine the Opposition neither knew how to
<pb n='622'/><anchor id='Pg622'/>
speak nor how to keep silence. None but the French,
who have put down their names to speak, appear to
have much desire to take any further part in the
discussion. Perhaps they think it ludicrous to take
any serious part in a debate which may be suddenly
broken off, and speak, as it were, with a halter round
their necks. And those who had thought the right
plan was to keep silence henceforth were the best
speakers of the Opposition; they do not therefore fall
readily into a policy they disapproved. Their view is
that, as the majority has done its worst and the minority
has not the spirit to follow the counsel of its leaders,
it is no longer worth while to fight against a result
which cannot be permanent.
</p>

<p>
This weak and vacillating attitude may possibly only
be a momentary consequence of the sudden commencement
of a discussion which seemed distant and for
which they were unprepared. On the other hand the
confidence of the majority increases, and they announce
the close of the debate on Corpus Christi. If the
minority remain as undecided as they were at the Conference
at Cardinal Rauscher's, an unfavourable issue
must be feared, and this will be their own fault, for sacrificing
their cause at the very moment they have for six
<pb n='623'/><anchor id='Pg623'/>
months been preparing for, through some of them not
choosing to be silent and the others not choosing to
speak.
</p>

<p>
The main argument urged against taking further
part in the discussion is that the historical and traditional
evidences against infallibility had been prepared
by men who lost their turn through the closing
of the general debate, and cannot be brought forward
in the special debate which is only about changes in
the text of the decree. The majority have thereby
testified their refusal to listen, not to certain speakers,
but to a certain portion of the theological argument, and
thus they prevent the investigation of tradition which
is so unwelcome to them. Only secondary matters can
be discussed now, while the main point is left untouched.
To many, and especially the Hungarians, this seemed
a betraying of the cause. The Hungarians absolutely
refuse to take any further part in the debates, for in
their eyes the Council has already condemned itself,
and they cannot too soon publish their opinion to the
world by recording their <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non placet</foreign>. They are therefore
dissatisfied with the Germans, who prevented
stronger measures being adopted, and some of them&mdash;like
Simor, who would not go on attending the sittings&mdash;have
<pb n='624'/><anchor id='Pg624'/>
even refused to sign the Protest to the Pope,
because it involves too much deference to the Council.
There are accordingly only 81 signatures, for the
Archbishop of Cologne has also refused to sign, but on
grounds precisely opposite to those of the Archbishop
of Gran.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the Vicar-General here is organizing all
sorts of demonstrations for the happy result of the Council
in the sense of the Court party. There were to be
three processions this week, and no pains were spared
to induce persons of rank, including ladies, to take part
in them. In many cases the attempt failed, for it is
idle to deny that a large portion of the Roman citizens
of all ranks turn away with indifference and contempt
from St. Peter's, and of course from all religion too.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Unita Cattolica</hi> predicts with triumphant confidence
that God will yield to their pious importunities
(<foreign rend='italic'>Iddio obbedira</foreign>), the Holy Ghost will fill the Council
Hall, descend upon each of the Fathers and work the
miracle of making them all boldly confess the infallibilist
doctrine. As in the year 33 the people, who
surrounded the house where the Pentecostal miracle
was wrought, asked, in amazement at the new
tongues of the Apostles, <q>Are these who speak Galileans?</q>
<pb n='625'/><anchor id='Pg625'/>
so in 1870 they will hear the Bishops and
Cardinals proclaim papal infallibility and will ask
themselves, <q>Are not these the men who wrote as
zealous Gallicans?</q> The Spirit of God will work this
<q>noisy miracle</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>strepitoso miracolo</foreign>).
</p>

<p>
A remarkable Petition has for some time been hawked
about, begging the Pope to promote St. Joseph to be
General Protector of the Catholic Church. Many have
objected that it is unfair to disturb the <q>riposo di San
Giuseppe,</q> but the notion finds much favour in the
Vatican.
</p>

<p>
It is impossible to foresee at this moment how the
great decision will turn out. The majority are evidently
consolidating their plans, and the argument may be
heard among them that, if papal infallibility were an
error, the devil would not have stirred up the war which
is being carried on against it. But one may still always
assume that 120 Bishops will say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, unless
some miserable formula of compromise is hit upon.
But the real decision will be when the Pope determines
to ignore these 120 opponents and proceed to
the order of the day.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='626'/><anchor id='Pg626'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-Fifth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 10, 1870.</hi>&mdash;If we look at the many minor
subdivisions of the two great parties and consider the
individual differences even within that narrower circle,
it is impossible to form any approximately sure conjecture
about the immediate issue of the contest. All are
agreed that the definition must be attempted or the
Council prorogued within the next few weeks, and
many Bishops are already preparing for departure.
The majority, with Manning at its head, insists on the
dogma being defined, however numerous and strong
the minority may prove, as being the very way to
exhibit most clearly the power and right of the Pope
to make a new article of faith with only a fraction of
the Council; and there can be no doubt that the Pope
inclines decidedly to this view himself. He is so completely
in the hands of the Jesuits that he will not
<pb n='627'/><anchor id='Pg627'/>
listen to counsellors like, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Antonelli, who makes no
secret in his confidential intercourse of the fact that he
has lost all influence in the matter and has no opinion
to give. The Pope's feeling towards the Opposition,
and especially towards its leaders, grows more bitter
every day. Strossmayer he regards as the mere head
of a sect (<foreign rend='italic'>caposetta</foreign>), and he termed another German
Cardinal and Archbishop the other day <q>quell' asino.</q>
The Jesuits make capital out of this disposition of
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> for effecting the ruin of all the men of the old
school who yet remain to him from his earlier and
more liberal days, while he leaves no stone unturned to
win over wavering Bishops to the infallibilist side. He
tried to work on the Portuguese lately by a visit, on
which a French prelate observed, <q>On n'a plus de
scrupules, ce qu'on fait pour gagner les voix, c'est
un horreur. Il n'y a jamais rieu eu de pareil dans
l'Église.</q> The most urgent next to Manning is Deschamps.
He has proposed canons anathematizing all
those Bishops who claim a share for the Episcopate
in the sovereign rights of the Church&mdash;a measure
expressly aimed at the Opposition and the views
professed by Maret both in his book and in the
Council.
</p>

<pb n='628'/><anchor id='Pg628'/>

<p>
Meanwhile some differences have arisen among the
majority, branching off at last into what may be called
a middle party. Even Pie of Poitiers is no longer
altogether in accord with Manning and Deschamps,
and Fessler said lately that a definition could not be
carried against 80 dissentient votes. This party disapproves
Bilio's treatment of Maret, which is disowned
by Cardinal de Luca, who in other respects often speaks
openly against Manning. Others, including Cardinals,
say plainly in reference to the minority Bishops that the
Papacy is threatened with destruction. The definition
must, if possible, be prevented by proroguing the Council,
and, failing that, the difficulties must be evaded by
an ambiguous formula. The prelates who speak thus
are too sober-minded not to perceive the political dangers
the new dogma would bring with it. They not only
think the price too high, but they dread being themselves
reduced by the definition under the intolerable
dominion of the Jesuit party. They frequently confer
with members of the Opposition with the view of
devising a compromise.
</p>

<p>
The French Opposition Bishops have lately had
another meeting and resolved to continue to take part
in the debates. The little misunderstanding between
<pb n='629'/><anchor id='Pg629'/>
them and the Hungarians has quite disappeared, and
several of the latter&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Simor&mdash;are said to be again
disposed to speak. And it is thought that many
speeches, suppressed by the violent closing of the
general discussion, will be delivered at the supreme
moment in the debate on the fourth chapter of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, which deals with infallibility.
</p>

<p>
The debate on the separate chapters has reached as
far as the third section <q>on the meaning and nature
of the Roman primacy.</q> As twenty-six speakers are
inscribed the discussion may last to the middle of next
month, and then will immediately follow the debate on
the fourth and most important chapter, which a great
number are likely to take part in, and there will be no
want of amendments. Conolly will propose the formula
that the Pope is infallible <q>as head of the Church
teaching with him</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>tanquam caput Ecclesiæ secum
docentis</foreign>), while others, as Dupanloup and Rauscher,
will reproduce the formula of St. Antoninus of Florence,
declaring the Pope infallible when he follows the judgment
of the Universal Church, <q>utens consilio,</q> or
<q>accipiens consilium Universalis Ecclesiæ.</q> This
amendment is said to have been seriously discussed
in the sitting of the Deputation on Faith on June 8,
<pb n='630'/><anchor id='Pg630'/>
though it amounts to pure Gallicanism, for Antoninus
says plainly (about 1450), <q>In concernentibus fidem
Concilium est supra Papam.</q> It is certain that the
Deputation will labour to make some changes in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> in view of the Opposition. Lastly, men like
Strossmayer press for an unambiguous denial of the
personal infallibility of the Pope.
</p>

<p>
The more recklessly the Court party are resolved to
advance, and the less they care for the destruction of
the Church which must result from a decree irregularly
enacted, the more are the Opposition disturbed at this
prospect, and often made irresolute, but these are only
passing moments of temptation. <q>Conscience before
everything,</q> said a German Bishop to me the other
day, who was weighed down by his gloomy views of
the future of the Church. Even men who are infallibilists
at heart speak of the terrible crisis in the Church,
and think only God can save her. The most decided
I meet are the Hungarians.
</p>

<p>
In the present debates from four to five speeches are
delivered at each sitting. The most remarkable were
those of Landriot and Dupanloup. The Presidents are
very ready to interrupt, as Bilio did when Verot, Bishop
of Savannah, was speaking on the preamble. Verot,
<pb n='631'/><anchor id='Pg631'/>
who is a man of high character but very singular,
submitted and left the tribune, saying, <q>Humiliter me
subjicio.</q> This conduct might suggest to the Presidents
that the definition would be hastened by a second
grand interruption.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='632'/><anchor id='Pg632'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-Sixty Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 11, 1870.</hi>&mdash;If the new article of faith is
accepted and proclaimed throughout the Catholic world,
what will be its retrospective force? On what decisions
and doctrines of previous Popes will it set the
seal of infallibility? What amplifications and corrections
of Catholic theology will it involve? These
questions are naturally raised here, not indeed by the
Bishops of the majority but by many of the Opposition;
only no one is in a position to give even an approximately
accurate answer from want of the necessary
books, and the Court party reckoned on this <q>penuria
librorum,</q> which Cardinal Rauscher has already complained
of. A German theologian who had previously
examined and studied the subject, undertook to answer
the anxious question of the Bishops, and I send you his
collection, which makes no claim to completeness, as a
<pb n='633'/><anchor id='Pg633'/>
not unimportant contribution to the history of the
Council.
</p>

<p>
The Jesuit Schrader, who is the most considerable
theologian of his Order since Passaglia's retirement, and
who has been employed both before and during the
Council for drawing up the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schemata</foreign>, on account of
the special confidence reposed in him by the Pope, has
shown, in his great work on <hi rend='italic'>Roman Unity</hi>,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Von der Römischen Einheit</hi>, Wien. 1866, vol. ii. pp. 444 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi></note> that, as
soon as papal infallibility resting on divine guidance
and inspiration is made into an article of faith, it must
by logical necessity include all public ordinances,
decrees and decisions of the Popes. For every one of
these is indissolubly connected with their teaching
office, and contains, whatever be its particular subject,
a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctrina veritatis</foreign> either moral or religious. Papal
infallibility is not a robe of office which can be put on
for certain occasions and then laid aside again. The
Pope is infallible, because he is, in the fullest sense of
the word, the representative of Christ on earth, and like
Christ he teaches and proclaims the truth by his acts as
well as his words; in short no public act or direction
of his can be conceived of as not having a doctrinal
significance. And thus Catholic theology and morality
<pb n='634'/><anchor id='Pg634'/>
will be enriched by the new dogma with not a few
fresh articles of faith, which will then possess the same
authority and dignity as those already universally
received as such.
</p>

<p>
There are indeed former papal decisions which, in
becoming themselves infallible through the proclamation
of infallibility, will in turn cover and guarantee the
infallible character of the collective Constitutions of all
Popes. The first of these decisions is the statement of
Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> in his Bull of 1520 against Luther, <q>It is clear
as the noonday sun that the Popes, my predecessors,
have never erred in their canons or constitutions.</q> The
second is the declaration of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> in his Syllabus,
<q>The Popes have never exceeded the limits of their
power.</q> This assertion too will become an infallible
dogma, and history must succumb and adapt itself to
the dogma. Let us however specify some of the new
articles of faith thus declared to be infallible.
</p>

<p>
1. According to the teaching of the Church, the
validity of the sacraments, and especially of ordination,
depends on the use of the right form and matter. The
whole Church for a thousand years regarded the imposition
of the Bishop's hands as the divinely ordained
matter of priestly ordination. But Eugenius <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, in his
<pb n='635'/><anchor id='Pg635'/>
dogmatic decree, decided that the delivery of the
Eucharistic vessels is the matter of the sacrament of
Orders, and the words used in their delivery the form.<note place='foot'>See the decree of Eugenius in Porter's <hi rend='italic'>Systema Decretorum</hi>, p. 535, and
in Raynaldus.</note>
If the doctrine of this decree, solemnly issued by the
Pope <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign> and in the name of the Council of
Florence&mdash;which however was no longer in existence&mdash;was
to be accepted as true and infallible, it would
follow that the Western Church for a thousand years,
and the Greek Church up to this day, had no validly
ordained priests. Nay more, there would at this
moment be no validly ordained priest or Bishop in the
Church at all, for there would be no succession.
And Eugenius gave an equally false definition of the
form of the sacraments of Penance and Confirmation.
</p>

<p>
2. According to the teaching of Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, in the
decretal <hi rend='italic'>Novit</hi>, and other Popes after him, the Pope is
able and is bound, whenever he believes a question of
sin to be involved, to interfere, first with admonition
and then with punishments. He can on this ground
reverse any judicial sentence, bring any cause before
his own tribunal, summon any sovereign before him,
simply to answer for a grave sin or what he considers
<pb n='636'/><anchor id='Pg636'/>
such, annul his ordinances, and eventually excommunicate
and depose him.<note place='foot'><q>Ad officium nostrum spectat de <emph>quocumque</emph> mortali peccato corripere
quemlibet Christianum; et, si correptionem contempserit, per districtionem
ecclesiasticam coercere.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Decretal. Novit</hi>, c. 13, De Judic. [Cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Janus</hi>, p. 158.]</note>
</p>

<p>
3. God has given to the Pope supreme jurisdiction
over all kings and princes, not only of Christendom
but of the whole earth. The Pope has plenary jurisdiction
over the nations and kingdoms, he judges all
and can be judged by none in the world, according to
Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> in the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Cum ex Apostolatus Officio</hi>, and
Sixtus <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> in the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Inscrutabilis</hi>. It is also a doctrine
of faith, to be received on pain of eternal damnation,
that the whole world is subject to the Pope even in
temporal and political matters, according to the Bull of
Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi>. Boniface adds that the
Pope holds all rights <q>in scrinio pectoris sui.</q>
</p>

<p>
4. According to papal teaching, it is the will of God
that the Popes should rule and <q>govern,</q> not only the
Church, but all secular matters and literally the whole
world. Thus Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> says; <q>Dominus Petro non
solum universam Ecclesiam sed etiam sæculum reliquit
gubernandum.</q>
</p>

<p>
5. According to papal teaching, as proclaimed by
<pb n='637'/><anchor id='Pg637'/>
Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> at the Roman Council of 1080, the Popes
with the Fathers assembled in Council under their
presidency are not only able, by virtue of their power
of binding and loosing, to take away and bestow
empires, kingdoms and princedoms, but can take any
man's property from him or adjudge it to any one.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Concil.</hi> ed. Labbé, x. 384.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. According to papal teaching the Pope alone can
remit all sins of all men. Thus Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> says in
his letter to the Patriarch of Constantinople.<note place='foot'>Innoc. <hi rend='italic'>Epist.</hi> ii. 209, p. 473, ed. Paris.</note>
</p>

<p>
7. According to papal teaching the Pope is ruler by
divine right of Germany and Italy during the vacancy
of the Imperial throne, because he has received from
God both powers, the spiritual and the temporal, in
their fulness (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jura terreni simul et cœlestis imperii</foreign>). So
John <hi rend='smallcaps'>xxii.</hi> has declared in his Bull of 1317.<note place='foot'>Raynald. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> xv. 156.</note> On
account of this doctrine millions of German and
Italian Christians, from 1318 to 1348, were placed
under ban and interdict and deprived of the sacraments
by the Popes.
</p>

<p>
8. The Pope by divine right can give whole nations
into slavery on account of some measure of their sovereign.
Thus Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> and Julius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> dealt with the
<pb n='638'/><anchor id='Pg638'/>
Venetians on account of territorial quarrels, Gregory
<hi rend='smallcaps'>xi.</hi> with the Florentines,<note place='foot'>Raynald. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> an. 1376, 1.</note> and Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> with the English
on account of Henry <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>'s revolting from him.
</p>

<p>
9. The Pope can also give full authority to make
slaves of a foreign nation merely because they are not
Catholics. Thus Nicolas <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> in 1454 authorized King
Alfonso of Portugal to appropriate the property of all
Mahometans and heathens of Western Africa, and to
reduce them to perpetual slavery.<note place='foot'>See Bull <hi rend='italic'>Romanus Pontifex</hi> confirmed by Callixtus <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> in 1456 and
Sixtus <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> in 1481.&mdash;Morelli, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti Novi Orbis</hi>, p. 58.</note> Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> in
1493 gave similar rights to the Kings of Spain over all
inhabitants of America, when bestowing on them that
quarter of the world with all its peoples.<note place='foot'>See Bull <hi rend='italic'>Inter Cæteræ</hi> in Raynald. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
10. According to papal teaching it is just and in consonance
with the Gospel to rob innocent populations,
cities, regions, or countries <foreign rend='italic'>en masse</foreign>, with the sole exception
of the infants and the dying, of divine service
and sacraments, by an interdict, merely because the
Sovereign or Government of the country has violated
a papal command or some right of the Church. Innocent
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, Martin <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, John <hi rend='smallcaps'>xxiv.</hi>,
Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>, and others have done so.
</p>

<pb n='639'/><anchor id='Pg639'/>

<p>
11. The Popes as God's vicars on earth can make a
present of whole countries inhabited by non-Christian
peoples, and hand over all rights of sovereignty and
property in them to any Christian prince they please.
Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> did this in his Bull addressed to Ferdinand
the Catholic and Isabella, as he declares, <q>auctoritate
omnipotentis Dei nobis in B. Petro concessâ ac
Vicariatûs Jesu Christi, quâ fungimur in terris.</q><note place='foot'>Raynald. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> an. 1493, 19.</note>
Historically it may be said with perfect truth, that the
peoples of the southern and middle regions of America
have been made the victims of the theory of papal infallibility.
The Spanish Church and nation, as well as
the sovereigns, have willingly received and maintained
this doctrine, because their claim both to Navarre and
America rested solely upon it, primarily on the Bulls of
Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> and Julius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> With the Gallican doctrine
both claims would fall through. Alexander had
empowered the Spaniards to make the Indians slaves.
All Spanish theologians appeal with Las Casas to <q>el
divino poder del Papa,</q> as he calls it, as the basis of
the Spanish dominion in America, and no one dared
to call in question the divine right of the infallible
vicar of God, by virtue whereof he had given over
<pb n='640'/><anchor id='Pg640'/>
millions of Indians to slavery, and thereby to extermination;
within eighty years whole countries were
depopulated.
</p>

<p>
12. It is just and consonant with the Gospel to burn
to death as heretics those who appeal from the sentence
of the Pope to a General Council. So Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> declares
in his Bull of 1517, <hi rend='italic'>Pastor Æternus</hi> (issued in the fifth
Lateran Synod).
</p>

<p>
13. Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> declared in another Bull, <hi rend='italic'>Supernæ Dispositionis</hi>,
also published in the Lateran Synod, that all
clerics are wholly exempt by divine right from all civil
jurisdiction, and therefore not bound in conscience by
the civil law.<note place='foot'>Harduin. <hi rend='italic'>Concil</hi> ix. 1756.</note>
</p>

<p>
14. According to the teaching of the Church, every
Christian is bound before God to do penance for his
sins by ascetic exercises of abstinence, self-denial and
almsgiving. On Church principles no one can dispense
from this obligation, because it rests on divine ordinance.
But the Popes teach that it may be relaxed or
superseded by means of plenary or particular indulgences
granted by themselves. They teach that to take part
in a war against enemies of the Holy See and in the
extermination of heretics is an effectual means for
<pb n='641'/><anchor id='Pg641'/>
gaining pardon of sins, and a complete substitute for
all works of penance. Thus did Paschal <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi> instruct
Count Robert of Flanders in 1102, that for him and his
warriors the surest means of obtaining forgiveness of
sins and heaven was to make war upon the clergy of
Liége and all adherents of the German Emperor, Henry
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi><note place='foot'>Baron. <hi rend='italic'>Annal. Eccl.</hi> an. 1102, sect. 18.</note> Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> charged King Philip Augustus of
France with the conquest of England, after he had
deposed King John, as a means for obtaining remission
of sin.<note place='foot'>Rog. Wendover, <hi rend='italic'>Hist.</hi> iii. 251.</note> Martin <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> again impelled the French in 1283 to
make war on the Aragonese by the promise of plenary
remission of their sins.<note place='foot'>Raynald. <hi rend='italic'>Annal.</hi> an. 1283-4.</note> And whenever there was a
war to be undertaken in the territorial interests of the
Holy See, or for the extermination of heretics, the Popes
urged men to take part in it as the surest and most
effectual means for cleansing them from all their sins
and attaining eternal happiness.
</p>

<p>
15. The Inquisition, both Spanish and Italian, is so
pure a product of papal teaching on faith and morals,
that there never was an Inquisitor who did not exercise
his office by virtue of Papal authority and in the Pope's
name, or whose power the Pope could not at any moment
<pb n='642'/><anchor id='Pg642'/>
he chose have wholly or partially withdrawn. All
essential laws and regulations of the Inquisition&mdash;the
accused being deprived of any advocate to defend him,
the admission of infamous and perjured witnesses, the
frequent application of the torture, the obliging the
civil magistrates to carry out capital sentences of the
Inquisitors, the prohibition to spare the life of any
lapsed heretic even on his conversion&mdash;all this emanates
from the direct and personal legislation of the Popes,
and has always been confirmed by their successors.
</p>

<p>
16. Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>, Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, and Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> teach
that it is in accordance with the principles of morality
and the Gospel to condemn a heretic seized by the
Inquisition, who has recanted, to lifelong imprisonment.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Litera Apost. Summorum Pontif. pro offic. S. Inquis.</hi>, Venet. 1607,
p. 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
17. Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> teaches that it is lawful for the
Pope to have the goods of those condemned for heresy
sold by his inquisitors, and to take the proceeds for
himself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 39.</note>
</p>

<p>
18. Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>, and Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>
teach that it is just and consonant with the Gospel to
deprive the sons and daughters of heretics, though
<pb n='643'/><anchor id='Pg643'/>
themselves Catholics, of their hereditary property.
But if the sons themselves accuse their parents and
get them burnt, then their inherited property, according
to papal doctrine, is exempt from confiscation.
</p>

<p>
19. According to papal teaching torture is an institution
thoroughly in harmony with morality and the
spirit of the Gospel, and should be employed particularly
against those accused of heresy. Thus Innocent
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Iv.</hi> and many later Popes have directed, and Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
ordered the rack to be very extensively used.
</p>

<p>
20. It is especially just and Christian, according to
the teaching and regulation of Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> in 1569, to torture
persons who have confessed or been convicted of
heresy, in order to make them give up their accomplices.<note place='foot'>Del Bene, <hi rend='italic'>Decreta et Constitt. Pontif.</hi> in his <hi rend='italic'>De Offic. Inquis.</hi> ii. 647.</note>
</p>

<p>
21. This same canonized Pope has ordered in a Bull
that even the sons of a man who has once offended an
inquisitor should be punished with infamy and confiscation
of their goods.
</p>

<p>
22. There is a whole string of papal decrees declaring
it a duty of conscience for every Christian to denounce
even his nearest relations to the Inquisition, and give
them up to prison, torture and death, if he perceives
<pb n='644'/><anchor id='Pg644'/>
any trace of heretical opinions or of anything forbidden
by the Church in them.<note place='foot'>[That this is no mere abstract theory, even in quite recent days, may
be seen from Blanco White's account of his mother's agony of mind when
she began to suspect his opinions and feared it might become her duty to
denounce him to the Inquisition.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
23. The same Popes have declared it to be just and
evangelical, and have ordered, that a relapsed heretic,
even if he recants, should be put to death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Decr.</hi> v. 7, 9, and Lucius <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> and Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> in Lib. vi. 5. 2. 4.</note> They have
further declared it to be moral and Christian-like that
in trials for heresy witnesses should be admitted to
accuse or give evidence against the accused, whose
testimony would not be admitted in any other court
on account of their former crimes or their infamy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> 5, 2, 5.</note>
</p>

<p>
24. According to papal teaching it is just and Christian
forcibly to deprive heretics of their children, in order
to bring them up Catholics. Thus Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>xii.</hi>, by a
sentence of the Holy Office at Rome, pronounced null
and void the edict of Duke Victor Amadeus of Savoy
in 1694 ordering their children, who had been forcibly
taken from them, to be restored to the unfortunate and
cruelly persecuted Waldenses under his government.<note place='foot'>Carsetti, <hi rend='italic'>Storia del Regno di Vittorio Amadeo di Savoia</hi>, Torino,
1856, p. 178. The Pope said it was <q>cosa da non potersi dir senza
lagrime.</q></note>
</p>

<pb n='645'/><anchor id='Pg645'/>

<p>
25. The Popes teach that a sentence once pronounced
for heresy can never be mitigated, nor pardon ever
granted to any one sentenced to death or perpetual
imprisonment for heresy. Thus Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> rules in
his Bull <hi rend='italic'>Ad Exstirpanda</hi>.<note place='foot'>Guerra, <hi rend='italic'>Pontif. Constit.</hi> i. 177.</note>
</p>

<p>
26. Up to 1555 it was the teaching of the Popes that
only those should be burnt who persisted obstinately in
maintaining a doctrine condemned by the Church, and
those who had relapsed after recanting into the same
or some other heresy. But in that year Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi>
established the new principle that certain doctrines,
if only just put forward and at once retracted, should
be punished with death. Thus whoever rejected any
ecclesiastical definition on the Trinity, or denied the
perpetual virginity of Mary and maintained that the
scriptural language about <q>brothers of Jesus</q> was to
be taken literally of children of Mary, was to be
classed with the <q>relapsed</q> and to be executed, even
though he recanted.
</p>

<p>
27. Up to 1751, theologians, especially Italians, who
defended trials for witchcraft and the reality of an
express compact with Satan, together with the various
preternatural crimes wrought thereby and the carnal
<pb n='646'/><anchor id='Pg646'/>
intercourse of men and demons (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>incubi et succubi</foreign>),
used to appeal to the infallible authority of the Popes,
the Bulls of Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>, Sixtus <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>xv.</hi> and
several more besides, in which these things are affirmed
and assumed and the due penalties prescribed for them.<note place='foot'>See, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Tartarotti, <hi rend='italic'>Apologia del Congresso</hi>, etc., p. 176.</note>
</p>

<p>
28. If an oath that has been taken is prejudicial to
the interests of the Church (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, in money matters), it
must be broken. So teaches Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Decr.</hi> ii. 24, 27.</note>
</p>

<p>
29. The Popes can dispense at their pleasure oaths
of allegiance taken by a people to their King, as
Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi>, Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi>, and many
others have done.
</p>

<p>
30. They can also absolve a sovereign from the
treaties he has sworn to observe or from his oath to the
Constitution of his country, or give full power to his
confessor to absolve him from any oath he finds it inconvenient
to keep. Such a plenary power Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>
gave to King John of France and his successors.<note place='foot'>D'Achery, <hi rend='italic'>Spicileg.</hi> iii. 714. [<q>Vobis et successoribus vestris Regibus
et Reginis Franciæ in perpetuum indulgemus, ut confessor religiosus vel
sæcularis quem vestrûm vel eorum quilibet duxerit eligendnm, vota per vos
forsitan jam emissa, <emph>ac per vos et successores vestros in posterum emittenda</emph>
... necnon juramenta per vos præstita, <emph>et per vos et eos præstanda in
posterum</emph>, quæ vos et illi <emph>servare commode non possitis</emph>, vobis et eis commutare
valeat in alia opera pietatis.</q> Two cases are reserved, viz., vows
of chastity and <emph>vows taken to the Pope</emph>.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> Thus
<pb n='647'/><anchor id='Pg647'/>
Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> absolved the Emperor Charles <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> from his
oath restricting his absolutism over popular rights in
Belgium, and again from his oath not to banish the
Moriscos from their home. And Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>iv.</hi> announced
to the Emperors Charles and Ferdinand that he dispensed
their oath to observe the Augsburg religious
peace.<note place='foot'>Bzov. <hi rend='italic'>Annal. Eccl.</hi> an. 1555, p. 306, ed. Colon.</note>
</p>

<p>
31. In 1648 a prospect of toleration was held out to
the sorely oppressed Catholics of England and Ireland,
if they would sign a renunciation of the following
principles, (α) The Pope can dispense any one from
obedience to the existing Government; (β) The Pope
can absolve from an oath taken to a heretic; (γ) Those
who have been condemned as heretics by the Pope
may at his command, or with his dispensation, be put
to death or otherwise injured. This renunciation
was signed by fifty-nine English noblemen and several
ecclesiastics, but Pope Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> declared that all
who had signed it had incurred the penalties denounced
against those who deny papal authority, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, excommunication,
etc. And so the penal laws against Catholics
remained in force for another century. Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> had
previously condemned the oath of allegiance prescribed
<pb n='648'/><anchor id='Pg648'/>
by James <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> for the English Catholics, and the execution
of a considerable number of them was the
result.<note place='foot'>Dodd, <hi rend='italic'>Church History of England</hi>, iii. 288; <hi rend='italic'>Tractat. Dogmat. et Scholast.
de Ecclesiâ</hi>, Romæ, 1782, ii. 245.</note>
</p>

<p>
32. The Popes teach that they can absolve men from
any vow made to God or empower others to do so, and
can even give them powers prospectively for dispensing
vows to be made hereafter. And thus they have
empowered royal confessors to absolve kings from any
future vow they may find reason to repent of.<note place='foot'>D'Acheray, <hi rend='italic'>Spicileg.</hi> iii. 721.</note>
</p>

<p>
33. The Popes have declared, by granting indulgences,
that their jurisdiction extends over Purgatory also, and
that it depends on them to deliver the dead who are
there and transfer them into heaven. Thus Julius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ii.</hi>
bestowed on the Order of Knights of St. George, restored
by the Emperor Maximilian, the privilege that,
on assuming the habit of the Order, the Knights <q>confessi
et contriti, a pœnâ et a culpâ et a carcere Purgatorii
et pœnis ejusdem mox et penitus absoluti et quittandi
esse debeant, planè et liberè Paradisum et regnum intraturi.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Acta Sanct. Bolland.</hi> Ap. 23, p. 157.</note>
Then or shortly before (1500) the doctrine
was first propounded in Rome, that the Popes could
<pb n='649'/><anchor id='Pg649'/>
attach to certain altars by special privileges the power
of delivering one or more souls from Purgatory.
</p>

<p>
34. The Pope can dissolve a marriage by placing one
of the parties under the greater excommunication, and
thus declaring him a heathen and infidel. Urban <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>
did this in 1363, when he excommunicated Bernabó
Visconti, Duke of Milan, depriving him and all his children
of all their rights and property and absolving his
subjects from their allegiance to him, and at the same
time pronouncing his wife free to marry again: <q>Uxorem
ejus uti Christianam a vinculo matrimonii cum hæretico
et infideli liberavit.</q><note place='foot'>Spondani, <hi rend='italic'>Annal. Eccl. Contin.</hi> ii. 595.</note>
</p>

<p>
35. Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> had paved the way for this by
establishing the doctrine that the bond between a Bishop
and his diocese is stronger than the marriage bond
between man and wife, and therefore as indissoluble by
man as the latter, and that God alone could dissolve it,
and the Pope as God's vicegerent.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Decr. de Transl.</hi> c. ii. 3, 4. [Cf. <hi rend='italic'>Janus</hi>, pp. 55, 56.]</note> It followed that
the Pope, and he alone, could also dissolve a validly
contracted marriage.
</p>

<p>
36. According to papal teaching it is praiseworthy
and Christian for a man, who has promised a woman
<pb n='650'/><anchor id='Pg650'/>
with an oath to marry her, to deceive her by a sham
marriage, and then break the bond and retire into a
monastery. This recommendation (to commit an act of
treachery at once and of sacrilege) was given by Alexander
<hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> in 1172, and it has been incorporated in
the code of canon law drawn up by command of the
Popes.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Decr.</hi> iv. 1, 16.</note>
</p>

<p>
37. The Popes teach that anyone attending a service
celebrated by a married priest commits sacrilege, because
the blessing he gives turns to a curse. So
Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi> teaches, in direct contradiction to the
doctrine of the ancient Church, and even to modern
theology.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Dist.</hi> 81, c. 15.</note> The notion has long since been exploded.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Concil. Gangrens.</hi> can. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
38. The Popes teach that they have the power of
rewarding services done to themselves with a higher
degree of eternal beatitude. Thus Nicolas <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> promised
all who should take up arms against Amadeus of
Savoy (the antipope Felix) and his adherents, not only
remission of all their sins, but an increase of heavenly
happiness, and gave his lands and property at the same
time to the King of France.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Concil.</hi> ed. Labbé, t. xiii. pp. 1322, 3.</note>
</p>

<pb n='651'/><anchor id='Pg651'/>

<p>
39. The Popes teach that it is false and damnable to
maintain that a Christian ought not to abstain from
doing his duty from fear of an unjust excommunication.
Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>xi.</hi> declares the contrary to be true in his
Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unigenitus</hi>, prop. 91.
</p>

<p>
40. Those who die wearing the Carmelite scapular
have papal assurance, resting on a revelation granted to
John <hi rend='smallcaps'>xxii.</hi>, that they will be delivered on the next
Saturday after their death by the Virgin Mary from
Purgatory and conveyed straight to heaven. So says
the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Sabbathina</hi>, confirmed by Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>,
Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>vii.</hi>, Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, Gregory <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiii.</hi>, and Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, by
the last after long and careful examination, and with
indulgences attached to it.<note place='foot'>See Amort, <hi rend='italic'>De Indulg.</hi> i. 146.</note>
</p>

<p>
41. According to papal decisions it is an excess of
extravagance and folly, and a detestable innovation, to
translate the Roman missal into the vernacular. It is
to violate and trample under foot the majesty of the
ritual composed in Latin words, to expose the dignity
of the holy mysteries to the gaze of the rabble, to
produce disobedience, audacity, insolence, sedition and
many other evils. The authors of such translations are
<pb n='652'/><anchor id='Pg652'/>
<q>sons of perdition.</q> Alexander <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> says this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>totidem
verbis</foreign> in his Brief of Jan. 12, 1661.<note place='foot'>D'Argentré, <hi rend='italic'>Collectio Judiciorum</hi>, Paris, 1728, iii. 297.</note> Nevertheless the
translated missal is in general circulation in France,
England and Germany, and is daily used by all the
most pious persons.
</p>

<p>
42. To receive interest on invested money is a grievous
sin according to papal teaching, and any one who has
done so is bound to make restitution. Papal legislation
makes it, under the name of usury, an ecclesiastical
offence to be judged by the spiritual tribunals. The
principle established by the Popes was, that it is unlawful
and sinful to ask for any compensation for the
use of capital lent out. And under the head of usury,
which was strictly forbidden, was included anything
whatever received by the lender in compensation for
his capital, every kind of interest, commercial business
and the like. Thus Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi> pronounced it heresy
to defend taking interest, and liable to the penalties of
the papal law against heresy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Clementin.</hi> i. 5, De Usuris, tit. 5.</note> His successors, Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>,
Sixtus <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, and especially Benedict <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>, adhered to this
condemnation of all taking of interest. The results
<pb n='653'/><anchor id='Pg653'/>
were that real usury was greatly advanced thereby,
that all sorts of evasions and illusory contracts came
into actual use, that the wealth of whole countries was
damaged, and commercial greatness, banished from
Catholic countries, became the monopoly of Protestant
countries.<note place='foot'>[On this subject, as also on persecution, the reader may profitably consult
<hi rend='italic'>Papal Infallibility and Persecution; Papal Infallibility</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Usury</hi>.
By an English Catholic. Macmillan, 1870.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='654'/><anchor id='Pg654'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-Seventh Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 18, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The great merits of Cardoni
are at length to receive their fitting reward. He has
hitherto been only Archbishop of Nisibis, a city that
has long ceased to exist; he has now become keeper
of the archives of the Roman Church. He was the
principal person intrusted last year with the grand
mystery of the fabrication of the new dogma, which
required for its success the strictest secrecy; the
Bishops, with the exception of course of the initiated,
were to be drawn to Rome unprepared and innocent of
the design and then to be taken by surprise. Had the
real object of the Council become known in the spring
of 1869, it might easily have proved a complete failure.
It was therefore intrusted to Cardoni's experienced
hands, who managed matters so well in the Commission
that the Bishops were kept in the dark, and his
lucubrations on infallibility were first printed in April,&mdash;it
<pb n='655'/><anchor id='Pg655'/>
is said after being considerably altered by the
Jesuits. The reward of Cardoni is a punishment for
Theiner, who has to suffer for his Life of Clement <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>
and for communicating to some of the Bishops a paper
on the order of business at Trent. The archives are
now closed to him, and he has had to surrender the
keys to Cardoni, though he nominally retains his office.
Every German scholar knows that Theiner, after coming
to Rome, became extremely reserved in his communications
and very cautious in his own publications,
always suppressing whatever might excite displeasure
there, and throw a slur on the Roman authorities. It
was much easier under his predecessor Marini&mdash;as
German and French scholars, such as Pertz, Raumer
and Cherrier, and the British Museum can testify&mdash;to
get a sight of documents or even transcripts, of course
for a good remuneration. Theiner, who was inaccessible
to bribery, knew that he had an abundance of enemies
and jealous rivals watching him, and carefully guarded
against giving them any handle against him. But the
original sin of his German origin clung to him; he was
not a Reisach and could not Italianize himself. There
is great joy in the Gesù, the German College, and the
offices of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>!
</p>

<pb n='656'/><anchor id='Pg656'/>

<p>
Theiner's great offence is his letting certain Bishops,
viz., Hefele and Strossmayer, see the account of the
order of business at the Council of Trent, showing the
striking difference between that and the present regulations
and the greater freedom of the Tridentine
synod. But Hefele had seen the Tridentine Acts in
the spring of 1869, and knew about it without Theiner's
help.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile there is no abatement of the bitter exasperation
in the highest circles. The three chief organs
of the Court&mdash;the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, the <hi rend='italic'>Unità</hi> and the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>&mdash;have
evidently received orders to vie with each other
in their descriptions of the <q>Liberal Catholics</q> as the
most abandoned and dangerous of men. For the
moment nobody is more abominated than a Catholic
who is opposed to infallibility and unwilling to see the
teaching of the Church brought into contradiction with
the laws of his country, which is what they mean by a
Liberal Catholic; such persons are worse than Freemasons.
The <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi> says they are more dangerous to
<q>the cause of God</q> than atheists, and have already
proved so. We know how his confessors, La Chaise
and Le Tellier, explained to Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi> that a Jansenist
is worse and more dangerous than an atheist.
</p>

<pb n='657'/><anchor id='Pg657'/>

<p>
In convents and girls' schools the new article of
faith is already strong enough to work miracles. The
<hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> relates <q>a miraculous cure wrought through an
act of faith in the infallibility of the Vicar of Christ,</q>
at Vienna on May 24. But that is little in comparison
with the greater and more difficult miracles which
the dogma will have to accomplish. If the English
proverb is true, there is nothing more stubborn than
facts; to remove them from history or change their
nature will be harder than to move mountains. Here
in Rome we are daily assured that the dogma has conquered
history, but these anticipated conquests will
have to be fought out, at least everywhere north of the
Alps, and cannot be won without great miracles. But
the Jesuits have never of course been without their
thaumaturgists, and they have been able to accomplish
the impossible even in the historical domain.
</p>

<p>
The Pope seems peculiarly annoyed at some of the
English Bishops opposing infallibility, probably because
Manning had told him that the English above all
others reverenced him as the organ of the Holy Ghost.
He lately broke out into most bitter reproaches against
Bishop Clifford of Clifton, before an assemblage of
Frenchmen, most of whom did not even know him by
<pb n='658'/><anchor id='Pg658'/>
name, and accused him of low ambition, saying that he
knew <q>ex certâ scientiâ</q> the only reason why Clifford
would not believe in his infallibility was because he
had not made him Archbishop of Westminster. Yet
there is perhaps no member of the Council whom every
one credits with so entire an absence of any ambitious
thought. The spectacle of such conduct on the part of
the man, who for twenty-four years has held the highest
earthly dignity, produces a painful feeling in some,
and contempt in others.
</p>

<p>
It is indeed disgusting to see the Court party compelling
men, most of them aged, to remain here to the
great injury of their health at a season when all who
are able to do so leave Rome, although many of them are
accustomed to a different climate and feel sick and exhausted.
They are treated like prisoners, and not even
allowed a holiday without special leave. No such egotistic
and unscrupulous absolutism, as what now prevails
here, has been seen in the Christian world since the days
of the first Napoleon. If there were any persons here
besides courtiers who could advise the Pope, as friends,
they would have to tell him that his credit before the
world demanded that an end should be put to this state
of torture, and the Bishops be allowed to depart, many
<pb n='659'/><anchor id='Pg659'/>
of whom are already dead. But, as was observed before,
even Antonelli does not conceal his impotence as regards
the Council, and as to others, it may suffice to
acquaint Transalpine readers with one detail of Roman
Court etiquette. If the Pope sneezes, the attendant
prelate must immediately fall on his knees, and cry
<q>Evviva!</q> in that position. Every man is at last what
his <foreign rend='italic'>entourage</foreign> has made him, and Pius has for twenty-four
years had every one kneeling before him, and has
been daily overwhelmed with adorations and acts of
homage, the effect of which may be read in Suetonius'
biographies of the Emperors.
</p>

<p>
The affair of the Prince Bishop of Breslau, who was
not allowed to leave Rome, has been arranged, by
Cardinal Antonelli ordering an apology to be made.
The regulations about refusing visas were only meant
for the Orientals, who are certainly detained in Rome
against their will, but in extending the same treatment
to German prelates the police had exceeded their
instructions and must be severely punished. Förster
answered that he did not wish this, and that Cardinal
de Angelis in his note had fully approved their conduct.
Meanwhile the same thing has been repeated: the visa
was refused to the suffragan Bishop of Erlau in Hungary,
<pb n='660'/><anchor id='Pg660'/>
who wanted to go to Naples, because he had received
no permission from the Secretary, Bishop Fessler.
</p>

<p>
The Franciscan, Hötzl, has made an explanation
satisfactory to the authorities, and is now again received
into favour, but he is to stay here for the festival
of June 29, on which day, as Pius was at least convinced
a week ago, the proclamation of the new dogma
with all imaginable pomp will take place. We live in
very humane times, and so the good Father from
Munich has suffered no worse martyrdom than the
heat. He has been instructed, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>genius loci</foreign> has done
its work, his Spanish General has simply reminded
him of certain rules of the Order&mdash;and so his conversion
has been very quickly, easily and happily accomplished.
He was not even threatened, I believe, with
the Inquisition, and even there he would not have
fared as ill as Galileo in 1633.
</p>

<p>
You must allow me, before relating the events of the
last few days in the Council Hall, to recur to the
occurrences of June 3, which I am now better acquainted
with, and which have proved to be sufficiently important
and eventful to deserve more detailed mention.
</p>

<p>
On the motion of Cardinal Bonnechose, who belongs
to the middle party, Cardinal de Angelis had asked the
<pb n='661'/><anchor id='Pg661'/>
Pope, directly after the session of June 2, whether he
would not permit the prorogation of the Council, in
view of the intolerable heat and the too long absence
already of so many Bishops from their dioceses. The
reply was a decided negative; there should be no
adjournment till the infallibilist <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was disposed
of. That was a hint to the majority, which they used
next day, as the wish to cut short the debates had been
loudly expressed for some days previously.
</p>

<p>
On the same day the Bishop of Pittsburg in North
America spoke against infallibility and defended the
Catholics of his country, who had hitherto known
nothing of this doctrine, but were yet genuine Catholics
in life and practice and not in name only, like the
Italians. Capalti immediately attacked him and imposed
silence. Bishop Dinkel of Augsburg followed.
Senestrey, Bishop of Ratisbon, in the previous sitting
had assured the prelates, who listened eagerly, that all
Germany, so far as it was Catholic, thought as he did,
and that every one was deeply penetrated with reverence
for the infallible Pope, while it was a mere invention
of certain evil-minded persons that there were those
in Germany who doubted this divine prerogative of
the Vicar of God. The astonishment was great; they
<pb n='662'/><anchor id='Pg662'/>
had heard so often that the aversion to the new dogma
was most deeply rooted and most widely spread in
Germany. Dinkel pointedly contradicted his colleague,
and warned them against being misled by such tricks.
He won great commendation, and his Biblical comments
were also found to be well grounded and to the
purpose.
</p>

<p>
Bishop Maret of Sura next ascended the tribune. He
like others has made advances since being in the
Roman school. If he had to write his work on the
Pope and Council now, he would take a far more
decided and bolder line. It was not without reason
that he pointedly distinguished the two things, papal
infallibility based and dependent on episcopal consent,
and the personal infallibility of the Pope deciding
alone, as the real subject of the controversy; for during
the last few days there have been Bishops who excused
their adhesion to the majority on the pretext that they
only found the former kind of infallibility in the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. Maret then showed in what a labyrinth the
majority was on the point of involving the Council.
Either the Council was to give the Pope an infallibility
he did not yet possess, in which case the donor was
higher than the receiver by divine and therefore inalienable
<pb n='663'/><anchor id='Pg663'/>
rights; or the Pope was to give himself an
infallibility he had not hitherto possessed, in which
case he could change the divine constitution of the
Church by his own plenary power; and if so why
summon a Council and ask its vote? There Bilio
angrily interrupted him, exclaiming to one of the most
learned and respected men of the French clergy, the
president of the Paris Theological Faculty, <q>Tu non
nôsti prima rudimenta fidei.</q> And then he gave the
explanation I mentioned before, that it did not belong
to the Council to bear witness, to judge and to decide,
but only to acknowledge the truth and give its vote,
and then to leave the Pope to define what he chose
by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. There could be
no talk here of majority or minority, but only of the
Council. The majority applauded. Maret remained
quiet, and asked without changing countenance, after
this effusion of Bilio's was at an end, <q>Licitumne est
ac liberum continuare sermonem.</q> Then all was
silence, and he was able to finish his speech without
further interruption.
</p>

<p>
Hereupon followed the violent closing of the discussion
by a decree of the majority. The euphemistic language
in which the <hi rend='italic'>Giornale di Roma</hi> announced it next
<pb n='664'/><anchor id='Pg664'/>
day was remarkable:&mdash;<q>Fù <emph>terminata</emph> la discussione
generale intorno alla materia di fede, che cominciata
con la Congregazione del 14 Maggio, era stata proseguita
per tutte le adunanze tenute nel suddetto spazio
di tempo, nelle quali ebbero parlato in proposito 65
padri,</q> etc.&mdash;such an obituary announcement as those
which used to be put into the Russian newspapers on
the death of a Czar, and which led Talleyrand to say,
<q>Il serait enfin temps que les Empereurs de Russie
changeassent de maladie.</q>
</p>

<p>
At the international meeting at Cardinal Rauscher's
on the 4th, when about 100 Bishops were present, some
of the bolder and more vigorous of them thought they
ought to show by observing complete silence that there
was no freedom at the Council. This view, as was
said before, did not prevail; and the alternative of a
protest was again adopted. On June 6, when the
special debate began, Bishop Verot of Savannah in
Georgia was the speaker who incurred the peculiar
displeasure of the Court party, and was maltreated by
Bilio. He objected to the words of the preamble
<q>juxta communem et universalem doctrinam,</q> as not
being true, because the doctrine referred to was not universal
or everywhere received, but was only the doctrine
<pb n='665'/><anchor id='Pg665'/>
of the so-called ultramontane school. At this murmurs
arose, and Verot remarked that a previous speaker&mdash;Valerga&mdash;had
been quietly listened to while he talked
for an hour and a half about the Gallican school, and
compared them with the Monothelite heretics; it was
only fair therefore to let him call the other school by
its name. Hereupon Bilio, who has assumed the rôle
of <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex officio</foreign> blusterer and terrorist, interposed in his
manner of a brawling monk, saying this topic had
nothing to do with the preamble, and could be
introduced afterwards in the discussion on the four
chapters.
</p>

<p>
Bishop Pie of Poitiers had proposed to his colleagues
on the Commission <hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi> to put the article on infallibility,
which was too crudely worded, into a shape
which all could accept, to which Manning and Dechamps
replied that it could not be improved upon, and
they would allow not the slightest change. And as
they had a majority in the Commission, Pie's wish was
strangled before its birth.
</p>

<p>
There is no want of restless activity and agitation in
favour of infallibility. The processions to obtain the
gift of infallibility from the Holy Virgin and the
numerous Saints, whose bones and relics fill the Roman
<pb n='666'/><anchor id='Pg666'/>
Churches, march with sonorous devotion through the
streets; the lazy and lukewarm are urged not to remain
idle at so important a time, and there is no lack
of intimations of the real profits which the dogma
must yield to the city. The Bishops of the minority
must have had marble hearts if they had continued
proof against so many fervent prayers for their conversion,
and wished still to defend their Gallican citadel
in spite of the general assault upon it. The Roman
parish priests have already presented an address in
favour of the dogma, but not&mdash;as I hear&mdash;till after the
opposition among them had been put down by the
highest authority. And now an urgent admonition has
been addressed to the University Professors either to
signify their desire for the definition or resign their
offices. All who receive salaries here have long been
accustomed to the soft pressure put upon them from
above, and are hastening, with a correct appreciation
of the importance of the wish of the authorities, to
follow lead. In the last few days we have had an
address from 40 Chamberlains of the Fathers of the
Council who <q>prostrate at the Pope's most sacred feet
earnestly desire to have the opportunity of sharing the
wholesome fruits (<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>saluberrimi frutti</foreign>) of infallibility and
<pb n='667'/><anchor id='Pg667'/>
the exultation felt by all true believers at the decree.</q>
The text of the address is given in the <hi rend='italic'>Unita Cattolica</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the chief Pontiff himself speaks in
most emphatic terms. The <foreign rend='italic'>Tedeschi</foreign>, notwithstanding
Senestrey's assurances, are in bad odour here. A letter
of the Papal Secretary in the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi> of June 2
describes the Opposition Bishops as <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>amateurs de nouveautés
dangereuses</foreign>, and I understand that in a letter to
Chigi, the nuncio at Paris, the Pope speaks of his infallibility
as <q>that pious doctrine, which for so many centuries
nobody questioned.</q> This expression is peculiarly
suggestive. That the Pope uses it in good faith is certain,
and that he has not gained his conviction by any
study of his own is equally certain. He has been
deluded by this monstrous lie, which no single even
half-educated infallibilist will make himself responsible
for, and thus has been driven into his perilous course.
No one, who has but glanced at the official Roman
historians, such as Baronius or Orsi or Saccarelli, can
possibly maintain seriously that there has been no
doubt for centuries about papal infallibility. This saying
lifts the veil and affords us a glance into the workshop,
where the Pandora's basket was fabricated which has
now been opened before our eyes. Future theologians
<pb n='668'/><anchor id='Pg668'/>
will know how to appreciate that weighty saying,
<q>no one for many centuries,</q> and I for my part would
say, like Gratiano to Shylock, <q>I thank thee for teaching
me that word.</q>
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Schwarzenberg, who spoke on the 7th
against the second chapter, was not, I think, interrupted,
as was however the Bishop of Biella, Losanna, on the
pretext that he did not keep to the subject. The old
man is a doubly unpleasant phenomenon to the Court
party, both from his boldness and clearness of view,
and as being a living proof that even an Italian may be
a decided opponent of infallibilism. At the international
meeting at Cardinal Rauscher's on the 8th it was
determined that the third chapter was to be especially
attacked in the speeches.
</p>

<p>
This third chapter deals with matters of very pregnant
import. It binds the Bishops to the acknowledgment
that all men are immediately and directly under the
Pope, which means that the so-called papal system is
to be made exclusively dominant in the Church, in
place of the old episcopal system, or in other words is to
displace the latter, as it existed in the ancient Church,
altogether. Bishops remain only as Papal Commissaries,
possessed of so much power as the Pope finds good to
<pb n='669'/><anchor id='Pg669'/>
leave them, and exercising such authority only as he
does not directly exercise himself; there is no longer
any episcopate, and thus one grade of the hierarchy is
abolished. The persons bearing the name of Bishops
are wholly different from the old and real Bishops;
they have nothing more to do with the higher teaching
office (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>magisterium</foreign>), and have no authority or sphere of
their own, but only delegated functions and powers,
which the Pope or any one appointed by him can
encroach upon at pleasure. Even this is not enough
for Archbishop Dechamps of Mechlin, who has now
proposed four canons anathematizing all defenders of
the episcopal system; this has roused the suspicions
even of several Bishops of the majority. These four
canons are so significant an illustration of the aims of
the party that they deserve to be put on record here:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1.) <q rend='pre'>Si quis dixerit Romanum Pontificem habere quidem
in Ecclesia primatum jurisdictionis, non vero etiam
supremam potestatem docendi, regendi et gubernandi
Ecclesiam, perinde ac si primatus jurisdictionis ab illâ
supremâ, potestate distingui posset&mdash;anathema sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
(2.) <q rend='pre'>Si quis dixerit talem potestatem Romani Pontificis
non esse plenam, sed divisam inter S. Pontificem
et episcopos, quasi episcopi a Spiritu S. positi ad
<pb n='670'/><anchor id='Pg670'/>
Ecclesiam Dei docendam et regendam sub unico summo
pastore etiam divinitus vocati fuerint, ut in supremâ
potestate totius Ecclesiæ capitis participent&mdash;anathema
sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
(3.) <q rend='pre'>Si quis dixerit supremam in Ecclesia potestatem
non residere in universæ Ecclesiæ capite, sed in episcoporum
pluralitate&mdash;anathema sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
(4.) <q>Si quis dixerit Romano Pontifici datam quidem
esse plenam potestatem regendi et gubernandi, non
autem etiam plenam potestatem docendi universalem
Ecclesiam, fideles et pastores&mdash;anathema sit.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='671'/><anchor id='Pg671'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-Eighth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 21, 1870.</hi>&mdash;What I have to communicate
in this letter is so important, that I find it desirable
to take it out of the historical order of events and let it
precede the detailed account of what occurred between
June 8 and 17.
</p>

<p>
A circumstance occurred on Saturday, which has
kept all who are interested about the Council in breathless
suspense ever since. Nothing in fact could be
more unexpected than that, at the moment when the
Opposition, though still maintaining the contest from a
sense of conscientious duty, almost despairs of success,
a fresh ally should join its ranks in the person of a
Roman Cardinal, whose accession is the more valuable
because he does not only speak in his own name,
but has concerted his speech with the fifteen Bishops
of his Order. In fact I hear his speech spoken of
in many quarters as the most important and unexpected
<pb n='672'/><anchor id='Pg672'/>
event in the Council. It must not of course be
supposed that Guidi's spirited speech represents adequately
the tendencies of the Opposition, but still it
must be affirmed that it involves a complete, and as
we believe irreconcilable, breach with the majority. In
order to enable people to appreciate the full weight
of the speech it is of some importance to premise
a brief account of the speaker.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Guidi has belonged, almost ever since his
entering the Dominican Order, to the convent of the
Minerva. For a long time he belonged to the theological
professoriate connected with the convent, and
enjoyed, as such, the well-earned reputation of great
learning and strict orthodoxy. When eleven years ago
Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> wished to send thoroughly trustworthy and
learned Roman theologians to the University of Vienna,
to inculcate genuine Roman science and views on the
young clergy, his eye fell on Father Guidi. After
working there for some years he returned to Rome,
having been meanwhile appointed Cardinal, and was
soon afterwards made Archbishop of Bologna; and as
the Italian Government promised to place no impediment
in the way of his residing there, he actually
betook himself to his See. But he soon found that it
<pb n='673'/><anchor id='Pg673'/>
was not the place for him. The Dominican Order had
seriously compromised itself in the notorious Mortara
affair, and accordingly the Bolognese rabble broke out
repeatedly into the most deplorable demonstrations
against the new Archbishop as a member of the hated
Order. He therefore returned to Rome, and administered
his diocese from hence. And here he was one of
the Pope's favourites, only during the last year he has
lost favour through his freedom of speech. Since then
he has been prosecuting his theological studies in retirement,
and it was pretty well known what he thought
about the personal infallibility of the Pope. Several
months ago he had assembled the Dominican Bishops
at the Minerva about this affair. His view prevailed,
and when Father Jandel, the General imposed on the
Order by the Pope and reluctantly accepted, tried to
put a pressure on them, they replied that they were
Bishops, and were bound, as such, to consult their consciences
when called to act as judges of faith. Then
began a notable agitation in the Order, which was
already divided into two camps. One arbitrary act
followed another. A so-called academy of St. Thomas
was opened, and hardly had the President taken his
seat, when he made a long speech, expounding the
<pb n='674'/><anchor id='Pg674'/>
doctrine of St. Thomas and the Order on papal infallibility
in the most tactless and violent manner to his
episcopal audience. A Dominican Bishop delighted
the Pope by getting up an infallibilist address among
his episcopal colleagues. Then followed a series of
writings defending St. Thomas against <hi rend='italic'>Janus</hi>. A
member of the Order was forbidden by the General,
Jandel, <q>to speak either publicly or privately about
infallibility,</q> and the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà Cattolica</hi> of June 18
praised the General for prefixing to the infallibilist
writing of a Dominican the approbation that in the
Dominican Order papal infallibility has always been
held as a Catholic truth.
</p>

<p>
Under these circumstances people were the less prepared
to find Cardinal Guidi, in contrast with his
numerous sympathizers in the College of Cardinals,
venturing boldly on a step which must embitter his
whole existence at Rome. The very first sentence of
his momentous speech must have concentrated the
anger of the majority on a Cardinal, as they thought,
so confused and oblivious of his duty. Guidi began
by affirming that the separate and personal infallibility
of the Pope, as stated in the amended chapter of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, was wholly unknown in the Church up to the
<pb n='675'/><anchor id='Pg675'/>
fourteenth century inclusive. Proofs for it are vainly
sought in Scripture and Tradition. The whole question,
he added, reduces itself to the point whether the
Pope has defined even one dogma alone and without
the co-operation of the Church. No man could claim
divine inspiration (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>doctrina infusa</foreign>). An act might be
infallible, a person never. But every infallible act had
always proceeded from the Church herself only, either
<q>per consilium Ecclesiæ sparsæ,</q> or <q>per Concilium.</q>
To know <q>quid ubique credatur, si omnes Ecclesiæ
cum Romanâ Ecclesiâ concordent,</q> information is indispensably
required. After this examination the Pope
sanctions doctrine <q>finaliter,</q> as St. Thomas says, and
only so can it be rightly said <q>Omnes per Papam docent.</q>
He then showed from the works of the Jesuits Bellarmine
and Perrone, <q>in definendis dogmatibus Papas
nunquam ex se solis egisse, nunquam hæresim per se
solos condemnâsse.</q> As Guidi uttered these words the
majority began to make a tumult under the lead of the
Italian Spaccapietra, Bishop of Smyrna. The Cardinal
saw he could not continue his speech. One bishop
cried <q>birbante</q> (scoundrel) and another <q>brigantino.</q>
But Guidi did not let himself be put out of countenance;
he answered with astonishing firmness and calmness
<pb n='676'/><anchor id='Pg676'/>
that he had a right to be heard, and that no one had
given to the Bishops the right of the Presidents.
<q>However, the time will come yet for saying your
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> or your <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, and then every one will be
free to vote according to his conscience.</q> Here for the
first time his speech was interrupted by loud applause,
and the words <q>Optime, optime</q> resounded from every
side among the Opposition Bishops. Manning was
asked by one of them, who stood near him, <q>Etes-vous
d'accord, Monsigneur?</q> He replied, <q>Le Cardinal est
une tête confuse.</q> On this a high-spirited Bishop could
not refrain from observing to the powerful Archbishop
of Westminster, <q>C'est bien votre tête, Monseigneur,
qui est confuse et plus qu'à moitié Protestante.</q>
</p>

<p>
After this pretty long interruption Guidi went on to
require a change in the chapter on infallibility <q>ut
clare appareat Papam agere consentientibus episcopis et
illis occasione errorum qui sparguntur petentibus, factâ
inquisitione in aliis Ecclesiis, præmisso maturo examine
et judicio et consiliis fratrum aut collecto Concilio.</q> This
was the true doctrine of St. Thomas; <q>finaliter</q> implied
something to precede, and the words <q>supremus
magister et judex</q> pre-suppose other <q>magistri</q> and <q>tribunalia.</q>
He concluded by proposing these canons:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1.) <q rend='pre'>Si quis dixerit decreta seu constitutiones a Petri
<pb n='677'/><anchor id='Pg677'/>
successore editas, continentes quandam fidei vel morum
veritatem Ecclesiæ universæ ab ipso pro supremâ suâ
et apostolicâ auctoritate propositas non esse extemplo
omnimodo venerandas et toto corde credendas vel posse
reformari&mdash;anathema sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
(2.) <q>Si quis dixerit Pontificem, cum talia edit decreta,
posse agere arbitrio et ex se solo non autem ex consilio
episcoporum traditionem Ecclesiarum exhibentium&mdash;anathema
sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
On sitting down he gave his manuscript to the
Secretary, and was soon surrounded by the leaders of
the Opposition, some of whom complimented him on
his speech, while others expressed their admiration of
his courage in resisting the attempts to interrupt him.
When a learned Italian Bishop asked Valerga, Patriarch
of Jerusalem, what he thought of this speech, he replied
audibly with the pun, <q>Si e squidato,</q> and on his interrogator
rejoining that anyhow the speech contained
nothing but the truth, Valerga let slip an expression
very characteristic of himself and his party, <q>Si, ma
non convien sempre dir la verità.</q>
</p>

<p>
After this speech a large number of Bishops left the
Council Hall, and excited groups of prelates might
be seen standing about in all directions. Cardinals
Bonnechose and Cullen addressed their very pointless
<pb n='678'/><anchor id='Pg678'/>
speeches to empty benches. Both pleaded for the proclamation
of the fourth chapter, as it stood. Bonnechose,
from whom Ginoulhiac and others had expected
a very moderate speech, proved that he had completely
gone over into Manning's camp, which cannot surprise
any one in the case of a man who himself made no
secret of his having no clear views on the question.
Cullen destroyed by his last speech the impression
made by the first, which had been admired, not for its
contents but for its strictly parliamentary form.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Guidi's courageous speech was destined
soon to bear its fruits. The Pope&mdash;the dearest object
of whose heart is the perfect freedom of the Council,
as the official journal stated the other day&mdash;sent for
him at once, and next day boasted to several Cardinals
of having energetically rebuked their undutiful colleague
for his heresy and ingratitude, and threatened him with
being called on to renew his profession of faith. But
the Cardinal may consider himself indemnified for
these hard words of the Pope by the homage he received
the day after his speech from almost the whole
body of the Opposition Bishops who came to visit
him. And he knows that the best of them were even
worse treated by his Holiness than himself, where it
was possible.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='679'/><anchor id='Pg679'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifty-Ninth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 22, 1870.</hi>&mdash;On the 13th the votes were
taken on the changes proposed in the preamble, and
taken by rising and sitting down.<note place='foot'>[This had been protested against by the minority. Cf. <hi rend='italic'>supr.</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg327'>327-8</ref>.]</note> Instead of <q>Vis et
salus Ecclesiæ ab eo (Papâ) dependet</q> was proposed
<q>Vis et soliditas in eo (Papâ) consistit.</q> The majority
seem to have thought that stronger. The debate began
with the speech of the Irish Archbishop of Cashel, a
member of the Commission. It is precisely in our days,
he said, that it is so necessary for the Pope to have
absolute and irresponsible authority, for therein lies
the one safeguard, first, against the encroachments of
Liberalism; secondly, against the Radical and anti-Church
policy of the Governments; thirdly, against the
poisonous and unbridled influence of journalism; and
fourthly, the absolute Pope can alone meet the ecclesiastical
and national enterprises of Russia or subdue
<pb n='680'/><anchor id='Pg680'/>
the political sects and ward off the Revolution which
is impending everywhere. In short, human society
requires a deliverer, and this deliverer must be omnipotent
and infallible. So it is said in the Commission,
and the Irish prelate, who was specially alarmed by
Fenianism, spoke in its name. As soon as the Pope
with the assent of the Council&mdash;or indeed without it&mdash;has
ruled his own omnipotence and infallibility, the
deliverance of mankind is accomplished.
</p>

<p>
The French Benedictine, Cardinal Pitra, undertook to
lift the assembly out of this cloudy region back to the
firm ground of facts, viz., the facts disclosed by himself.
He expatiated on the collection of canons in the Greek
Church, saying that those relating to the Roman See
had been falsified, and the Russian Church was above
all implicated in this system of forgery, which had
brought things to such a pass that there was no
authentic collection of canons in the Oriental Church.
This was probably intended to serve as a diversion, for
the enormous fabrications in favour of papal omnipotence,
which were carried on for centuries and are
incorporated in the codes of canon law, had been frequently
before referred to in a very suspicious manner
in the Council. Even the Bishop of Saluzzo, who is
<pb n='681'/><anchor id='Pg681'/>
almost a thorough-going Roman absolutist, had called
the collection of canons (Gratian's, etc.) an Augean
stable. Pitra went on to indulge in an uncommonly
fervid philippic against the Machiavellian and persecuting
Russia. But he forgot to say one thing, viz., that
in no country would the impending decrees be received
with such satisfaction as in Russia, nowhere would they
give greater pleasure than in that great Northern State
which considers itself the happy heir of Rome in the
East. So much must be known even in Rome, that
on the day the dogma is promulgated all the bells in Mohilew,
Wilna, Minsk, etc., will resound to ring the knell
of Rome. Pitra was followed by Ramirez y Vasquez,
Bishop of Badajoz. He maintained in the style and
tone of Don Gerundio de Canpazes, the doctrine that
the Pope is Christ in the Church, the continuation of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, whence to him
belongs the same extent of power as to Christ Himself
when visibly on earth. Maret had announced his
intention of speaking, with the view of combating the
four anathemas of Dechamps, which were so manifestly
directed against his book. But Dechamps, on learning
this, told the Bishop of Sura that, if he would keep
silence, he would withdraw his anathemas, and excused
<pb n='682'/><anchor id='Pg682'/>
himself by alleging his zeal for the new dogma, assuring
Maret that he had a good heart and meant no harm.
So Maret renounced his design of speaking.
</p>

<p>
On the 14th, Haynald, in spite of his bodily suffering,
delivered a long polemical speech against the majority,
and maintained his reputation of being the best Latin
speaker after Strossmayer. Jussuf, the Melchite
Patriarch of Antioch, came next with an apology for
the Oriental Churches and their liberties. He pointed
out in earnest words the danger of their defection, if
the present design of taking away their ancient rights
was carried out. He produced letters from his home
telling him that he had better not return at all than
bring back from Rome decrees curtailing their ecclesiastical
liberties. And if the Pope chose to send back
another Patriarch instead of him, they might be very
sure he would not be received. Bishop Krementz of
Ermeland observed that Holy Scripture made, not
Peter, or as is here understood the Pope, the foundation
of the Church, but Christ, and then as secondary
foundation the Apostles and Prophets. Only after
these and in dependence on them could this designation
be applied to the See of Rome.
</p>

<p>
It had indeed been already observed among the
<pb n='683'/><anchor id='Pg683'/>
minority how monstrous it was to make the Pope <q>the
principle of unity in the Church,</q> as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> puts
it, and that the ancient Fathers speak indeed of an
<q>exordium unitatis</q> established in the person of Peter,
but had never called him, and still less the Bishop of
Rome, the principle of ecclesiastical unity, which would
be logically inconceivable. In the voting, which was
again taken by rising and sitting down, the little band of
dissentients disappeared before the consentient mass,
and the expression <q>principium unitatis,</q> opposed as
it is both to logic and tradition, was accepted. Before
the voting Bishop Gallo of Avellino had uttered in the
name of the Commission some Neapolitan mysticism
about Adam and Eve and the mysteries already revealed
in Adam and Eve of the Church resting on the Pope.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Mathieu was the first speaker on the fourth
chapter on infallibility. His long and powerful speech
was mainly directed against Valerga, who had outraged
the French by his attack on the <q>Gallican errors.</q> It
was a well-delivered panegyric on the French nation,
which had shed the blood of her sons to restore Rome
to the Pope, and without whose troops at Civita Vecchia
the Council could not remain in Rome. The only
doubt is whether this Valerga is worth as much notice
<pb n='684'/><anchor id='Pg684'/>
as the French have accorded to him. After Mathieu
Cardinal Rauscher spoke. His speech was very inaudible
owing to the nature of the Council Hall, but
was clear and well grounded, and showed how the
acceptance of a personal infallibility, by virtue of which
every utterance of a Pope must be believed by all
Christians under pain of eternal damnation, is equally at
issue with facts and with the former tradition of the
Church, and must have a fatal effect in the future. He
referred to Vigilius, Honorius, the reordinations of Sergius
and Stephen, and the contradiction between
Nicolas <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> and John <hi rend='smallcaps'>xxii.</hi>, and commended the formula
of Antoninus requiring the consent of the Church as a
condition. He could never assent to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> without
mortal sin. <q>We knew all that from your pamphlet,</q>
said Dechamps while he was speaking. <q>But you have
never refuted it,</q> replied Rauscher.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Pitra was to have followed, but he was
unwell, and the sitting was broken off. The Presidents
had issued an instruction that no one should speak out
of his turn, and if prevented on the regular day should
lose his right altogether. The rule in this case affected
the zealous infallibilist Pitra, and accordingly the
Bishops were dismissed before the usual hour.
</p>

<pb n='685'/><anchor id='Pg685'/>

<p>
The two next days, the 17th and 18th, were festivals,
and there was no sitting held. As there are already
75 speakers enrolled for the fourth chapter, the promulgation
obviously cannot take place on June 29, and
the Council will last on into July. There is indeed a
simple means of gratifying the desire of the Pope and
curtailing the pains of the Bishops, who are now absolutely
tortured by the heat: the majority can any day
cut short the special debate, as they have already cut
short the general discussion. It may of course be objected
that this procedure, of depriving the Bishops of
their right of speaking and violently imposing silence
upon them, overthrows the nature of a Church Council,
where every Bishop is meant to bear witness not only to
his own belief, but to the tradition of his country and the
faith of his diocese. If the Bishops are deprived of this
right&mdash;and that too where so momentous a question is
at issue and there is such diversity of opinion&mdash;the
freedom essential to a Council is wanting.
</p>

<p>
The Pope becomes more lavish of his admonitions and
instructions every day. In the last Papal <hi rend='italic'>Capella</hi> Patrizzi
assured him the faithful were impatiently awaiting
the proclamation of infallibility, whereon Pius, in
presence of several Bishops of the minority, replied that
<pb n='686'/><anchor id='Pg686'/>
there were three classes of opponents of the dogma,
<emph>first</emph>, the gross ignoramuses, who did not know what it
meant; <emph>secondly</emph>, the slaves of princes, he said <q>of
Cæsar,</q> referring both to Vienna and Paris; <emph>thirdly</emph>, the
cowards, who feared the judgment of this evil world.
But he prayed for their enlightenment and conversion.<note place='foot'>The text of the speech, as it is now printed in the journals, has been
subsequently corrected and toned down.</note>
This was of course applied here universally to the
Bishops of the Opposition. Moreover the Pope had
just before had a letter written to certain canons of
Besançon, saying that all the objections raised now had
been triumphantly refuted a hundred times over, and
that as to appealing to the results of historical criticism
and the examination of texts, viz., to the huge mass
of deliberate falsifications and forgeries, these were
<q>des anciens sophismes ou mensonges contraires aux
prérogatives du St. Siége.</q> The remark touches
Rauscher, Schwarzenberg, Dupanloup, Hefele, Maret,
Kenrick, Ketteler (in the pamphlet he circulated), and
some thirty more. There is much dispute here as
to the paternity of those views which Pius emits both
orally and in writing. Has he got them from the
<hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, or are the Jesuit writers of that journal only the
<pb n='687'/><anchor id='Pg687'/>
pupils of the Pope, who has received this information
<q>by infused science</q> from the Virgin Mary? On that
point opinions differ. The majority, who are quite
aware that every one would think it a joke to call
Giovanni Maria Mastai a learned theologian, hold to
the latter view, and to the well-known picture painted
by the Pope's own order, where the <q>actus infusionis</q>
is represented to the eye. Their favourite watchword
is that every one who does not accept the decree is, or
in a few days will be, a heretic and enemy of the
Church; his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non placet</foreign> consummates his separation
from her, and hence Manning has already proposed that
each of these Bishops should have his excommunication
handed him with his railway-ticket when he leaves
Rome. Livy says, <q>Hæc natura multitudinis est,
aut servit humiliter aut superbe dominatur;</q> the
<q>multitude</q> in the Hall combines both characteristics.
</p>

<p>
On June 18 the Pope observed a German priest
among those admitted to an audience, and asked who
he was, when he replied that he was secretary to a
Bishop, who is well known for his learning and his
fallibilist views. Pius turned away with an exclamation
of disgust. Of another very eminent dignitary of
<pb n='688'/><anchor id='Pg688'/>
similar views he is wont to say in the bitterest terms,
that his opinions are prompted solely by personal enmity
to himself.
</p>

<p>
The majority are said to be very impatient, so that
many anticipate the violent closing of the debate on
Saturday, the 25th. And the greater number of the
intending speakers on the fourth chapter, now increased
to a hundred, belong to the Court party, who might say
that they are only willingly renouncing the pleasure of
hearing their own ideas put forward. But then the
speeches of Darboy, Place (of Marseilles), Maret, Clifford,
Schwarzenberg, Simor, Dupanloup, and Haynald
would also be suppressed. Hefele was the first to put
down his name, as he was not allowed at the time to
answer the fierce attack of Cullen. On his inquiring
after some days when his turn would come, he was told
that he was the fifty-first in order, as all who came
before him in age and rank must speak before he could
be permitted to open his mouth. A little later he was
told he came seventy-first, so that his hope of being
able to vindicate himself in the Council is almost at an
end. Meanwhile he has had a brief reply to the attack
of a Frenchman, de la Margerie, printed at Naples.
</p>

<p>
The minority have resolved to send a deputation to
<pb n='689'/><anchor id='Pg689'/>
the Pope to petition for the adjournment of the Council,
since it is horrible to detain so many aged men, many
of whom are sick, by violence in this unhealthy city.
They will of course meet with a positive refusal, for the
Jesuits and the holy Virgin, who is always appealed
to, are for carrying out the compulsory system to the
last. But you may judge how the heat and the moral
and physical miasmas are working on the Bishops from
the fact that there are now only five or six on a bench
where thirty Bishops used to sit, though most of the
others are in Rome or the neighbourhood. Indeed they
are kept prisoners here, and Antonelli said recently to
a diplomatist, <q>Si quelque Evêque veut faire une
partie de campagne (like Förster) la police n'a rien à y
voir, mais s'il voulait quitter le Concile, alors ce serait
différent,</q> so that every foreign Bishop lives here under
the inspection of the police, who are to take care that
he does not escape. This statement seemed to the diplomat
to whom it was made so seriously to affect the
sovereign rights of his Government, that he at once
reported it.
</p>

<p>
The Roman logic, as may be seen from the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, is
simply this: the Council is what it is through the Pope
alone; without him it can do nothing and is an empty
<pb n='690'/><anchor id='Pg690'/>
shadow. Freedom of the Council therefore means
freedom of the Pope: if he is free, it is free. You may
infer what reception will be accorded in the Vatican to
the petition just resolved upon for a secret voting on
the Papal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. There could be no more eloquent
testimony to the real state of things and the estimate
formed of the freedom of the Council, for it is dictated
by the knowledge that a secret ballot would give a very
considerable number of negative votes, at least 200, if
the private expressions of opinion of the Bishops may
be relied upon, while no one here ventures to hope for
more than 110 or 115 <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non placets</foreign> in a public voting.
There are certainly some hundred, even of the Papal
boarders, who would say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, if their votes were
sheltered by secrecy. Neither the Catholic nor the
non-Catholic public has any idea of the extent to which
a Bishop in the present day is dependent on Rome, and
how difficult or impossible the administration of his
office would be made for him by the disfavour of
Rome. The worst off of all are the Bishops under Propaganda,
who have simply no rights. For them to
speak of freedom, after the Pope has announced his
wish, would be ludicrous, and to this category belong
not only all the Oriental and Missionary Bishops, but
<pb n='691'/><anchor id='Pg691'/>
the American and English also. And even for the
Bishops of the older Sees, who are under the <hi rend='italic'>Congregatio
Episcoporum et Regularium</hi>, and are protected by the
common law or by Concordats, the practice of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>
is a field full of man-traps, a belt studded with nails,
which only needs to be drawn in by curialistic hands to
make the nails pierce the body of the obnoxious Bishop.
As things now are here, and after Pius has gone
further than any Pope for centuries in glaring partisanship
and open threats of enmity against all dissentients,
secret voting must appear the only possible means of
securing even a shadow of freedom for the decrees of
the Council. If the voting is public, the word freedom,
as used of the Council, could only be regarded as
a mockery. And it is very well known here that the
Pope's <foreign rend='italic'>entourage</foreign> do everything in their power to maintain
him in his belief that the Opposition will melt
away at last like snow before the sun, and hardly four
negative votes will remain.
</p>

<p>
Last year the theologians summoned for the preliminary
work were sent home at the beginning of June,
and scarcely one or two even of the directing Commission
of Cardinals stayed longer in Rome. Now the 15th or
20th of July is spoken of as the day for the promulgation,
<pb n='692'/><anchor id='Pg692'/>
and if it should be a little earlier there will still
be many of the prelates who will return from Rome ill
and with their constitutions permanently shattered.
The ancients found the word <q>amor</q> reversed in the
name of the eternal city (<foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Roma</foreign>), and the Bishops are daily
reminded of it. Meanwhile the brilliant recompense
of Cardoni's services has rekindled the hopes of the
majority; there are fifteen or sixteen vacant Hats, which
will be given to those who have deserved best of the
new dogma. The merits of the Italians are not conspicuous;
they have most of them done moles' work,
chiefly as spies, for that business is conducted here to
an extent almost unheard of in Europe. Valerga is of
course an exception, who has excelled all the Italians
as a speaker. After him, Mgr. Nardi has so greatly
distinguished himself by his active zeal that a red Hat
would seem a fitting ornament of his head, but then
there are very suspicious circumstances, only too
notorious in Rome. The men who have done and will
do the most important services, who are indeed the
modern Atlases to carry the main weight of the new
dogma on their lusty shoulders, are of course the
Jesuits. Pius is penetrated with the feeling that their
services are above all praise and recompense. A
<pb n='693'/><anchor id='Pg693'/>
Jesuit cannot be rewarded with titles and colours and
dresses, but he can receive a Cardinal's Hat. The names
of Toletus, Bellarmine, Pallavicini, de Lugo, recall grand
memories. Not long before its dissolution in 1736, three of
the Order were in the Sacred College together&mdash;Tolomei,
Eienfuegos and Salerno. That might happen again,
and the College would gain in capacity and working
power. As Kleutgen cannot be thought of, on account
of his trial before the Inquisition, and Perrone is too
old, the next candidates would be Curci, Schrader and
Franzelin. Father Piccirillo, from his intimate relations
to the highest personage, would possess the first
reversionary claim, and his services have been rewarded
in a manner greatly desired and long aimed at
by his Order, for he has received the permission, unprecedented
in the history of Rome, to go alone into the
secret archives and there work. Such an event would
at other times have been regarded at Rome as a downfall
of the heavens or a sign of the last judgment, and
even now it has produced perplexity and amazement
in genuine Roman circles. For every one who
passes the threshold of the chamber of archives incurs
<foreign rend='italic'>ipso facto</foreign> excommunication. So the Order is firmly
seated in this unapproachable sanctuary. There is no
<pb n='694'/><anchor id='Pg694'/>
fear of indiscreet publications. Piccirillo, far from
publishing anything, will excel in mere negative activity.
</p>

<p>
Among foreign candidates for the Cardinalate Manning
stands out as a star of the first rank in the Roman
firmament. He may claim some paternity of the great
idea of at last treating the apotheosis of the Papacy
seriously, and he long ago suggested to Darboy how
nice it would be for the two chief capitals of Europe,
London and Paris, each to have its Cardinal, which
could be best brought about by furthering the infallibilist
definition. But Darboy would hear nothing of it.
Next to Manning comes Dechamps of Mechlin; but
as the Pope has named him primate, which is indeed a
mere title, he is thought here to have had his reward.
Spalding, who has deserved so well of Rome, would of
course create a great sensation in the United States
by the red hat, which has never yet been seen there.
Among the French, Dreux-Brézé of Moulins and Pie
of Poitiers come first in order. There is great difficulty
about Simor, the ill-advised and ungrateful son who
had the Cardinalate, so to speak, in his pocket, and is
now causing such distress to the lofty giver. How fortunate,
say the Court party, that d'Andrea is no longer
<pb n='695'/><anchor id='Pg695'/>
alive. Rauscher, Schwarzenburg, Guidi, d'Andrea,
Simor&mdash;that would be too much. But now for the
Germans! There it is difficult to select; all the faithful
ones must be rewarded, who have literally sweated
and are sweating daily in the interest of the good cause&mdash;Fessler,
Martin, Senestrey, and then Stahl, Leonrod,
Rudigier and the Tyrolese Gasser and Riccabona. The
Tyrol has had no Cardinal since Nicolas of Cusa (Bishop
of Brixen) and Madrucci (Bishop of Trent), and there
most especially would the return of a countryman with
a red hat be kept as a national festival.
</p>

<p>
Margotti has had a denial inserted in the <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>
of the fact that a Sicilian Bishop related the story of
St. Peter and the Virgin Mary in the Council Hall.
On this I have merely to remark that it was told me
the same evening by three Bishops, none of whom heard
it from one of the others, and the speaker was Natoli,
Archbishop of Messina. We know what Margotti's
assertions and denials are worth.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='696'/><anchor id='Pg696'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixtieth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 23, 1870.</hi>&mdash;On reading the last document
emanating from the Council, composed by the
most distinguished of the American Bishops, an inexpressible
feeling of astonishment comes over me, as
often before, at the new and unprecedented spectacle
so boldly offered to the startled world, and I again
recognise the necessity of accounting to myself for the
condition of the Catholic Church which has made this
possible, and remembering that the position of the
Papacy in the modern Church for some time past has
been hardly less novel and strange than this present
infallibilist Council.
</p>

<p>
The two great events of modern history, the Reformation
and the Revolution, have made the Papacy what
it is,&mdash;the Reformation by forcibly driving the Catholic
half of Christendom into centralization, the Revolution
by removing the last remaining independent powers
<pb n='697'/><anchor id='Pg697'/>
within the Church, viz., the Gallican Church with the
Sorbonne and Parliament. So it came to pass that
with the Restoration the Church was surrendered to
the discretion of the Papacy, just as at the same time
the Roman States, by the withdrawal of all provincial
and corporate independence, became a uniform and
absolute monarchy. The very spirit of the nineteenth
century, without much help from Rome, contributed to
the consolidation and strengthening of this new system.
The re-awakening and growth of distinct Church feeling
in powerful classes of the educated nations, the legitimist
ideas of the ruling classes of Europe, and later
on the combined Catholic and Liberal interest of the
struggle against hostile bureaucracies and the antipathy
of parliamentary majorities&mdash;principles of reaction and
principles of freedom all alike in turn subserved the
cause of the Church, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the Papacy. For although
Papacy and Church were still not wholly identified in
fact, to say nothing of right, the times did not suggest
the need for distinguishing between them.
</p>

<p>
There was opportunity given, one might suppose,
for a great display of activity. A fresh creative spirit
passed here and there through the new world of the
nineteenth century, and not least through the Catholic
<pb n='698'/><anchor id='Pg698'/>
portion of it, which produced in individuals many fair
flowers of art and science, and also of practical piety.
It was enough to catch the inspiration, in the sense of
the age and of the eternal needs of mankind, and as
the wilderness blossoms under the hand of a gardener,
there grew out of the ruins of the Revolution a new
era of rich Christian life. But the destiny of Catholicism
was to be the reverse. There was indeed then, and is
now, urgent need of an immense deal to be done in the
Church; to carry on the daily ecclesiastical administration
by no means satisfied the requirements of the age,
but the Church herself needed and needs reform&mdash;reform
everywhere from the outer rind to the marrow.
But reform, whether in Church or State, generally
results from the struggle of rival forces. And the only
power surviving in the Church possessed neither the
capacity nor the inclination for acts of world-wide
import; it seemed to have no sense but for the maintenance
and extension of its own dominion. Such
Catholic works as the nineteenth century has produced
did not emanate from Rome, and were little if at all
helped on by her. On the contrary, Rome put a restraint
on everything which did not serve directly as an instrument
of her power. Every germ of relative independence
<pb n='699'/><anchor id='Pg699'/>
seemed to be viewed with distrust. Here and
there the intellectual labour of a lifetime of Catholic
study was simply extinguished. The youth of talent
turned from a path which led only to unfruitful conflicts.
The once promising seed-plot of original Catholic
production became dry, and even the noblest creation
of the century, the female orders for nursing the sick,
are said by those best informed to show symptoms of
decay. There was stillness. From Rome one only
heard a monologue. The Bishops' Pastorals were its
echo, or were so long-winded and verbose that the
simple and noble language of the pronunciamento
issued by the newly elected Bishop of Rottenburg was
quite a phenomenon. Men boasted of the Catholic
unity, which had never been so palpable and so undisturbed
as in these latter days, but it was a unity of sleep
over the grave of intellectual and all higher ecclesiastical
life.
</p>

<p>
Who will bring us deliverance? asked every one who
looked at things independently of the mere force of
habit with a clear eye. The answer was that there
was no longer any independent power anywhere but
in the centre, and therefore deliverance could only
come from thence; the lever could only be applied in
<pb n='700'/><anchor id='Pg700'/>
Rome, and nobody but a future Pope was in a position
to do this.
</p>

<p>
How peculiarly are things disposed! In Rome they
had all they could desire. There has never been a
time when Catholic Christendom lay so submissively
at the Pope's feet. In fact he possessed practically the
prerogative of infallibility, for no one contradicted
whatever he might say. The Bishops were disused to
learning; there was hardly among them a theologian of
note, and therefore they had no spirit for theological
convictions of their own. It seemed to be the office of
their lives to re-echo the Roman oracles. The daring
project of defining the Immaculate Conception met
with hardly any serious opposition, though many Bishops
could not conceal from themselves that the faith of
antiquity and the belief of their own dioceses knew
nothing of the new dogma. And then in the Encyclical
and Syllabus came a perfect flood of irrational and
unchristian propositions. What did the Bishops of
Christendom, the judges of faith, do? Some put a
more rational interpretation on it, the others took it all
for granted as it stood; everywhere the new articles of
faith and morality were received as though all were in
the most regular order. That was in fact a situation
<pb n='701'/><anchor id='Pg701'/>
without any precedent, and there was nothing left to
wish for but its continuance for ever. The talisman
to secure this continuance was discovered in the tenet of
papal infallibility, and to make this into a dogma and
foundation-principle of the Church has been the grand
object to which the thoughts and measures of the last
ten years have been directed.
</p>

<p>
Even this last point might perhaps have been
attained by adhering to the practice which has prevailed
hitherto of quietly collecting the votes of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Ecclesia dispersa</foreign>, and passing over the isolated opponents
still left to the order of the day. Why was the
perilous plan of a General Council adopted instead of
this? Perhaps with the view of extruding and getting
rid of for the future all the doubt still attaching to
the assent of the Church dispersed; certainly in the
full confidence, after all that had occurred previously,
that there was absolutely no demand the Bishops would
dare to refuse. The authorities felt in the position,
ecclesiastically speaking, of being able to challenge the
Holy Ghost Himself to say if He would refuse to set
His seal to the deformation of the Church.
</p>

<p>
All the world knows how the Vatican Council has
been managed. It was as if they wished to keep the
<pb n='702'/><anchor id='Pg702'/>
Holy Ghost a prisoner, with eyes and ears bandaged.
But things did not go as they wished. On the contrary
this extreme step of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> roused a reaction,
which seems likely to lead to a revolution that will take
its place in history and introduce a complete change
in the future. Certainly the deliverance is coming
from the centre, but not as was thought and desired,
not in peace but in storm, not as a gift of the highest
human wisdom but as a nemesis. For it is an old law,
equally prevalent throughout the Christian and Heathen
world, that pride will always bring its punishment.
</p>

<p>
We are already in the third stage of this movement.
First came, quite unexpectedly, protests against infallibility
from the lay world, instead of the accustomed
clouds of incense, and then still more unexpectedly the
military obedience of the clergy was broken through
by the most decided intimations of conscientious sincerity
and scientific conviction; and now even the
princes of the Church are putting themselves at the
head of the Opposition. There is still some difference
between the Church dispersed and a great assembly,
many as are the restrictions imposed here by fraud and
violence on the free expression of opinion. The man
of knowledge and character, who would there remain
<pb n='703'/><anchor id='Pg703'/>
alone and isolated, gains tenfold power and energy here.
Consciences are aroused. Many a Bishop who left
home with his head wholly or half involved in the haze
of Jesuit doctrine, receives the impulse here to unprejudiced
study and is irresistibly driven to the side of
right and truth. Besides, it is no small thing to have
seen the state of things at Rome for six months with
one's own eyes.
</p>

<p>
We shall do well not to raise our expectations too
high. The spirit of slavery, which has become ingrained
in one generation after another, cannot be scared away
in weeks and months from men's minds and the conduct
of affairs. So much the more noteworthy is every
increase of outward or inward strength in the struggling
minority at the Council. And so I return to the
work already mentioned, to remark that its contents
justify us in reckoning the author, the venerable Archbishop
Kenrick of St. Louis, with Strossmayer, Hefele,
Dupanloup, Darboy, Schwarzenberg, and Rauscher
among the heads of the Opposition.
</p>

<p>
It is only matter of course that much which has
often been said before should be repeated here, which
we may pass over, without however omitting to
notice the impression which the plain and practical
<pb n='704'/><anchor id='Pg704'/>
nature of the treatise is calculated to produce. What
concerns us more nearly is the distinctness and firmness
with which the present claims of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> are repudiated,
as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, in pointing out the injury to episcopal
rights involved in the desired definition. <q>The Bishops,</q>
says the author, <q>have always been held judges of faith.
But assuming that the Pope alone is infallible, the Bishops
may indeed assent to his judgments, but cannot exercise
any real judicial office, and thus lose a right inherent in
the episcopal office. But this right they are in no position
to resign, however much they might wish it, for its
connection with the episcopal office rests on the institution
of the Saviour.</q> In another passage he says,
<q>Appeal is made to the number of theologians, who in
the course of ages have defended infallibility. But that
does not make it an article of faith. Divine Providence
does not permit such opinions, when they have no true
ground or do not agree with the records of revelation, to
become articles of faith. It has been a view held for centuries
that Christ gave Peter and his successors supreme
authority in secular affairs also. But there is no one in
our own day who does not reject and deplore it and seek
for an excuse for it in the circumstances of the age,
except the Roman clergy, in whose <foreign rend='italic'>Proprium Officium S.
<pb n='705'/><anchor id='Pg705'/>
Zachariæ</foreign> we read the other day, that the Pope by his
apostolic authority transferred the sovereignty over the
Franks from Childeric to Pepin. And yet the Popes
have ventured to make this usurped authority, so far as
in them lay, into an article of faith.</q> Then follows a
reference to the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi>, and the similar
statements of Bellarmine and Suarez. <q>On the other
hand,</q> Kenrick proceeds, <q>we find at this Council
some Bishops, of whom the present writer is one, who
have published and solemnly sworn to a declaration that
the Pope, at least in England, possesses no such power.
This example might teach those who are pressing for
the definition of papal infallibility, that even the most
solemn papal decree, and though issued like that of
Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi> at a Synod, is null and void if it be not
grounded on God's word in Scripture and Tradition.
<q>Commenta delet dies, judicia naturæ confirmat.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
We may recognise in the tone of these remarks, with
all their moderation, an advance on the part of the
Opposition to greater freedom and distinctness of speech.
And this impression is still more confirmed by Kenrick's
judgment on the well-known proceedings in and out of
Council. <q>There is yet another argument used,</q> he
says, <q>which I can only refer to with reluctance. It
<pb n='706'/><anchor id='Pg706'/>
is urged that papal infallibility is so vehemently
attacked by its opponents that, if it is not now declared
to be an article of faith, it is virtually admitted
to have no foundation, and surrendered to the daily
increasing violence of its assailants without protection.
Those who so argue forget that they are themselves
responsible for having occasioned this deplorable controversy,
by announcing to the astonished world that at
the Vatican Council two new dogmas would be proposed
to the faithful, papal infallibility and the Assumption
of the Blessed Virgin, and in a similar spirit
publishing works in England and the United States on
the Pope's authority, with a view of preparing men's
minds for the acceptance of these dogmas. In view of
this temerity, which has not only not been rebuked but
has even been defended in Bishops' Pastorals, and with a
clear perception of the unhappy consequences that must
follow from it, men, who deserve eternal remembrance
and will obtain praise of God, have lifted up their
voice to remind the faithful that in matters of faith no
innovation is allowed, that papal infallibility as distinct
from the infallibility of the Church has no evidence of
Scripture and Tradition, and that the office of Councils
is to investigate and not to carry decrees by acclamation.
<pb n='707'/><anchor id='Pg707'/>
And just because they speak the truth openly, these men
are reproached with stirring up the people by the very
persons who would eventually have interpreted their
silence as assent and have used it as ground for carrying
out their own designs. Then again it is urged upon
good people that something must be done under the
circumstances for maintaining the honour of the Papacy,
forgetting that Bishops should have not circumstances
but the truth before their eyes, and that it is as little
competent to the successors of the Apostles as to the
Apostles themselves to do anything against the truth,
but only for the truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
In another passage, after dwelling on the preponderance
of the Italian prelates he proceeds, <q>If they wish
to give the decrees of the Council the character of the
testimony of the whole of Christendom, without altering
the inequality of numbers of the representatives of
different nations, there is the precedent of the plan
adopted at the Council of Constance with the happiest
results, viz., taking the votes by nations or languages
and not by heads. And this method would secure the
speedier and better settlement of the matters under
discussion, for the Bishops of the same tongue or nation
know the needs of their Churches better and would
<pb n='708'/><anchor id='Pg708'/>
understand how to meet them; moreover they could
express their views more readily in their mother tongue
than is possible in the General Congregation where
Latin is obliged to be spoken, which they have perhaps
lost their familiarity with through the long course of an
active life, so that they have either to keep silent or to
speak under difficulties. And by this means a discussion
and searching examination would become practicable,
which must necessarily take place at a Council,
but which is wanting at the Vatican Council. There is
indeed abundant opportunity for making speeches, but
the great number of Fathers and the order of business
imposed on the Council cuts off all opportunity for
submitting any point to a close examination by regular
debate with one speaker answering another. Five
months have already passed since the opening of the
Council, with what result need not be said here.
Meanwhile the question of the new definition has
roused a great excitement throughout the Christian
world, which is still on the increase; some desire the
definition, others emphatically repudiate it. Bishops
have entered the lists against Bishops, priests have
written against their own and against other chief
pastors, and won commendation from the supreme
<pb n='709'/><anchor id='Pg709'/>
authority for doing so. The journals of both parties,
with their not always true reports or at least crooked
reasonings, keep the whole world in a state of agitated
suspense as to what is coming. May one say to what
all this will lead and what will be the end of this
violent tempest which has so suddenly risen in a clear
sky and seems likely to produce much mischief? They
are certainly deceived who fancy that the promulgation
of the new dogma will at once lay the waves; the contrary
is far likelier. Those who would obey the decrees
of the Council will find themselves in a most difficult
position. The civil Governments will treat them, not
without some plausible grounds, as less trustworthy
subjects. The enemies of the Church will throw in
their teeth the errors said to have been taught by the
Popes or sanctioned by their conduct, and will laugh to
scorn the only possible answer&mdash;that they did not promulgate
these errors as Popes but as individual Bishops
of Rome. And then the scandalous Church history
records of certain Popes will be urged as so many
proofs of the internal discrepancy of Catholic belief,
for men do not distinguish between infallibility and
impeccability, which appear to them inseparably connected.</q>
</p>

<pb n='710'/><anchor id='Pg710'/>

<p>
What Kenrick thinks the Opposition ought to do is
not expressly stated, but may be gathered from his
language. He says indeed that <q>whoever does not
submit to the decisions of an Œcumenical Council does
not deserve the name of Catholic,</q> but he adds, <q>if the
indispensable conditions have been observed in holding
the Council.</q> And he makes moral unanimity one of
these conditions. He does not allow the crude conception
which seems to prevail among the majority, that a
Council has simply to vote and then the world must
reverence the result as the dictate of the Holy Ghost.
The infallibility of Councils is to him no miraculous
work of inspiration, but a simple result of the constitution
the Church received from her Founder, whose
assistance will never fail her, if she remains true to
Scripture and Tradition and the agreement of the various
particular Churches.
</p>

<p>
Kenrick and all the Bishops who hold firmly with
him may meet the impending decision in quietness and
confidence, for the defeat of their opponents is certain,
whether they persist and define and promulgate the
new dogma, or retreat at the last moment. In the
former case deliverance will come through a catastrophe
whose consequences defy all calculation. And yet even
<pb n='711'/><anchor id='Pg711'/>
in Rome there do not lack pious minds which, undisturbed
by these terrible dangers, desire to see the
insolent enterprise carried through, in the belief that
the prevalent corruption can only be overcome by a life
and death struggle. <q>Quod medicina non sanat, ferrum
sanat.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='712'/><anchor id='Pg712'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixty-First Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 24, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Rome is just now like an
episcopal lazar-house, so great is the number of the
prelates who are sick and suffering and confined to
their bed or their chamber. And still greater is the
number of those who feel worn out and impatiently
long to be gone. But there are persons here who calculate
thus&mdash;that the Italians, Spaniards and South
Americans are accustomed to the heat, and bear it very
well, and as to the Germans, French and North Americans&mdash;<q>vile
damnum si interierint.</q>
</p>

<p>
Guidi's speech still occupies men's minds, and forms
the topic of conversation in conciliar circles. Men are
astonished at the courage of a Cardinal in daring so
directly to contradict the Pope. While Pius has word
written to Paris that <q>for many centuries no one
doubted the Pope's infallibility,</q> Guidi declares it to be
an invention of the fifteenth century.
</p>

<pb n='713'/><anchor id='Pg713'/>

<p>
The following account of the dialogue between the
Pope and the Cardinal is current at Rome, and it seems
to rest on the authority of Pius himself, who is notoriously
fond of telling every one he meets how he has
lectured this or that dignitary:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
Guidi, on being summoned by the Pope directly after
his speech, was greeted with the words, <q>You are my
enemy, you are the coryphæus of my opponents, ungrateful
towards my person; you have propounded
heretical doctrine.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Guidi.</hi>&mdash;<q>My speech is in the
hands of the Presidents, if your Holiness will read it,
and detect what is supposed to be heretical in it. I
gave it at once to the under-secretary (<foreign rend='italic'>sottosecretario</foreign>)
that people might not be able to say anything had been
interpolated into it.</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Pope.</hi>&mdash;<q>You have given
great offence to the majority of the Council; all five
Presidents are against you and are displeased.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Guidi.</hi>&mdash;<q>Some
material error may have escaped me, but
certainly not a formal one: I have simply stated the
doctrine of tradition and of St. Thomas.</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Pope.</hi>&mdash;<q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>La
tradizione son' io&mdash;vi farò far nuovamente la professione
di fede.</foreign></q> <hi rend='italic'>Guidi.</hi>&mdash;<q>I am and remain subject
to the authority of the Holy See, but I ventured to
discuss a question not yet made an article of faith; if
<pb n='714'/><anchor id='Pg714'/>
your Holiness decides it to be such in a Constitution,
I shall certainly not dare to oppose it.</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Pope.</hi>&mdash;<q>The
value of your speech may be measured by those
whom it has pleased. Who has been eager to testify
to you his joy? That Bishop Strossmayer who is my
personal enemy has embraced you; you are in collusion
with him.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Guidi.</hi>&mdash;<q>I don't know him, and have
never before spoken to him.</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Pope.</hi>&mdash;<q>It is clear
you have spoken so as to please the world, the Liberals,
the Revolution, and the Government of Florence.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Guidi.</hi>&mdash;<q>Holy Father, have the goodness to have my
speech given you.</q>
</p>

<p>
The same afternoon a Spanish Bishop belonging to
the extremest Infallibilists said, <q>Absque dubio facies
Concilii est immutata. Oportet huic sermoni serio
studere.</q> When Guidi asked how the Cardinals had
taken his speech, Mathieu replied, <q>Cum seriâ silentiosâ
approbatione,</q> on which Guidi observed, <q>Sunt
quidam qui idem mecum sentiunt, sed deest illis animi
fortitudo.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>La tradizione son' io</q>&mdash;it would be impossible to
give a briefer, more pregnant or more epigrammatic description
of the whole system which is now to be made
dominant than is contained in those few words. All
<pb n='715'/><anchor id='Pg715'/>
the members of the <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, the thick volumes of Schrader,
Weninger and the Jesuits of Laach are outdone by
this clear and simple utterance. Pius will take rank in
history with the men who have known how by a happy
inspiration to throw a great thought into the most
adequate form of words, which impresses it for ever indelibly
on the memory. The formula is worthy to be
classed with the equally pregnant saying of Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>,
<q>The Pope holds all rights locked up in his breast.</q>
It is bruited about here from mouth to mouth, and the
analogy of Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi>, which inevitably occurs to everybody,
reaches even further. Every day since I have
witnessed the drama being enacted here, has the saying
suggested itself to me, <q>L'Église, c'est moi.</q> Any
one who would form a judgment of the state of things
here should be recommended above all to read a work
like, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Lemontey's <hi rend='italic'>Essai sur l'établissement monarchique
de Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi></hi>, or the instructions of the King for
the Dauphin. One sees there how absolute sovereignty,
the intoxicating sense of irresponsible power&mdash;and
spiritual absolutism is far more overpowering than
political&mdash;leads almost of necessity to the notion of
infallibility and divine enlightenment. Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xiv.</hi> says
seriously and drily to his son, <q>As God's representative
<pb n='716'/><anchor id='Pg716'/>
we have part in the divine knowledge as well as the
divine authority.</q><note place='foot'><q>Il est sans doute de certaines fonctions où, tenant, pour ainsi dire, la
place de Dieu, nous semblons être participants de sa connaissance, aussi
bien que de son autorité,</q> etc.&mdash;Lemontey, p. 151 (éd. de Bruxelles).</note> And he warns him that all his own
errors had arisen from his too great modesty in giving
ear to extraneous advisers. For eight hundred years the
question has been disputed, why the Popes are so short-lived,
and the phenomenon has been ascribed to a special
divine dispensation which removes them betimes, that
they may not be morally poisoned by too long enjoyment
of their dignity&mdash;<q>ne malitia mutaret intellectum.</q>
</p>

<p>
The minority perceive, on a calmer consideration,
that the two canons proposed by Guidi would not
provide sufficient security for the episcopate taking part
in the teaching office of the Church according to the
integrity of her constitution. The second indeed, like
a well-aimed arrow, hits the mark. It calls the thing
by its right name, and anathematizes the purely personal
infallibility of the Pope, independent of the consent of
the Church and resting on direct divine inspiration, as
a heresy, which it unquestionably is in the eyes of
every theologian who knows anything of the Church
and her tradition; but then, after the Pope has so
<pb n='717'/><anchor id='Pg717'/>
openly and expressly committed himself to precisely
this view of the Church, it is thought impossible here
in Rome, and close to the Vatican, to throw an anathema
in his face. And besides the expression in the first
canon, that the consentient <q>consilium Ecclesiæ</q> is
requisite for an infallible papal utterance, is open to
the same charge of vagueness as the notorious and
much-abused <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign>, and could as easily be explained
away into the mere arbitrary caprice of the
Pope. It would always rest with him in the last
resort to maintain <q>ex certâ scientiâ</q> that the <q>consilium
Ecclesiæ</q> agreed with his own judgment.
</p>

<p>
A remodelling of the fourth canon has been undertaken,
but the new formula is not known. It is however
much talked of among the Bishops, and the
general view is that it remains substantially unchanged,
and still contains the personal infallibility of the Pope
independently of the Church. Manning had said that
the utmost regard that was possible should be paid to
the views of the Opposition in the alteration of the
chapter. And so those Bishops still hope for the
accomplishment of their desires who, like Ketteler and
Melchers, entreat that only one, however sterile, verbal
concession may be made, so as to give them a bridge
<pb n='718'/><anchor id='Pg718'/>
on which to pass over the gulf safely into the camp of
the majority.
</p>

<p>
I lately heard a Roman layman say that what most
surprised him among the many wonderful things he
had seen here was the contempt for the Catholic
Church which prevails here. For that contempt could
not be more emphatically expressed than by the Pope
appropriating to himself what according to the ancient
doctrine belongs to her, and declaring himself the sole
and exclusive organ of the Holy Ghost. It is the same
here universally; when one talks with a Roman, the
<hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, the Pope, is everything, and the Church nothing
but the <q>contribuens plebs.</q> My informant thought it
was easy enough to understand the view of born Romans,
but difficult to give any rational account of the attitude
of the episcopal majority, for it must be clear to every
one of them that the promulgation of the new dogma
would destroy irrevocably all episcopal independence
of Rome, and strip the nimbus from the brow of the
Bishop who is a successor of the Apostles. I observed
to him that in Romance countries this primitive idea
of the episcopate had long since vanished, as he might
easily convince himself by asking the next Italian
peasant or shopkeeper he met what was his notion
<pb n='719'/><anchor id='Pg719'/>
of a Bishop. And five-sixths of the majority belong
to these countries,
</p>

<p>
In the Congregation of June 20 the Deputation put
up one of its members, Bishop d'Avanzo of Calvi and
Teano, to speak. For there was urgent need of promptly
meeting the great scandal given by Guidi, and deterring
any Cardinal who might be so disposed from following
his example. The speaker allowed that in dogmatic
decrees the tradition of the Church must be consulted
and the Holy Ghost invoked, but how this was to be
done was left to the judgment of the Pope, By his
second canon Guidi passed over <q>ad aliena non Catholica
castra,</q> exceeded all Gallicans and wanted&mdash;he, an
Italian, a Dominican and a Cardinal&mdash;to canonize Gallicanism.
A shudder ran through the ranks of all the
Italians who live between Ferrara and Malta, but they
remembered for their comfort that the unworthy son of
the peninsula had been for some years professor at
Vienna, and it was obvious that the German malaria he
had caught there was the cause of this matricidal heresy.
</p>

<p>
Guidi had said that the admonition to Peter to confirm
his brethren pre-supposed something to be confirmed,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, that the Pope only confirmed the doctrine
already maintained by the Bishops. To this d'Avanzo
<pb n='720'/><anchor id='Pg720'/>
answered that it was utterly uncatholic, and one must
rather begin from above and not from below, and
ascribe the authorship and initiation of doctrine to the
Pope, who was immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost;
<q>causa princeps infallibilitatis est assistentia Spiritûs
Sancti.</q> And here followed a statement that must be
given word for word: <q>Supervacaneum est omne
additamentum, nulla emendatio in decreto et canone
schematis acceptatur; nulla conditio, nulla limitatio
admittetur per deputationem; inutilis est igitur omnis
labor? <q>Animalis homo non percipit quod de cœlo
est.</q></q><note place='foot'>1 Cor. ii. 14.</note> To say the definition was inopportune was
merely pandering to the corrupt portion of society, and
especially to the tribe of Government officials. The
speaker added emphatically: <q>Satis fit servis Satanæ,
qui sunt gubernantes, negantes ordinem supernaturalem&mdash;ergo
Decretum est opportunum. In Pontifice
Spiritus Domini vivit et agit, Pontifex ergo hôc Spiritu
agente errare non potest.</q> It became known at once
in the Council that this declaration, which annihilated
so many hopes, had been made in the name and by
special command of the Pope, and that <q>the animal
man</q> meant the Opposition.
</p>

<pb n='721'/><anchor id='Pg721'/>

<p>
The two next speakers were the titular Patriarchs
Ballerini and Valerga. The first said with notable
frankness, <q>Were we to let personal infallibility drop,
we should destroy the obedience due to the Pope and
exalt ourselves against God Himself.</q> In other words,
the Vice-God orders us to declare him infallible, and of
course we obey implicitly.
</p>

<p>
Valerga's appearance was the beginning of a comedy,
which was repeated in subsequent sittings. He wanted
to prove papal infallibility by inferences from the
Florentine decree, which was received by all; but he
was twice interrupted by the Presidents for not keeping
to the question. He thereupon left the tribune, not
without remarks being made by Opposition Bishops
that they saw this treatment was not reserved for them
only. The same thing happened on June 22 to Bishop
Apuzzo of Sorrento and Archbishop Spaccapietra. On
the 20th, towards the end of the debate, Archbishop
MacHale of Tuam in Ireland spoke with great severity
against the decree, the fatal consequences of which he
seems to appreciate better than most of his Irish colleagues.
Bishop Apuzzo reminded the Hungarians that
they once had a primate (Szelepcsenyi, a pupil of the
Jesuits) who had summoned a synod to condemn the
<pb n='722'/><anchor id='Pg722'/>
Gallican Articles of 1682, and that quite recently a
Provincial Synod at Colocza had used language of very
infallibilist sound. Haynald took part in that Synod,
and he, as well as Rauscher, to whom the same reproach
was addressed, had already observed that it would not
do to put a strictly logical interpretation on mere
complimentary phrases. In the course of his speech
Apuzzo became still more abusive. <q>Those are the
sons of Satan,</q> he exclaimed at last, <q>who say the
Bishops are judges in the Church. No! we are but
poor sinners.</q> At the same time he proposed a supplement
still more peremptory than the chapter. Spaccapietra
came to grief in Church history, which is more
grossly mishandled at Rome and in the Council Hall,
when it is appealed to at all, than anywhere else. This
time St. Polycarp's yielding to the Pope about the
observance of Easter&mdash;he notoriously did just the reverse&mdash;was
to serve as an example to the Opposition.
When the speaker went on to utter fierce invectives
against Cardinal Guidi, he was interrupted. He declared
he had only something to say against the schismatics,
but the President closed his mouth in theatrical fashion
saying, <q>Cedat verbum tintinnabulo.</q> So he left the
rostrum.
</p>

<pb n='723'/><anchor id='Pg723'/>

<p>
Men breathed more freely when, after these hollow
declamations, two British Bishops brought the clear
practical sense of their race and country to bear on the
question and the previous discussion of it. The first of
them, Archbishop Errington, who was formerly Cardinal
Wiseman's coadjutor but soon got out of favour
at Rome, pointedly characterized the vicious nature of
the whole transaction; there were speeches on both
sides, one affirming, another denying, and no one could
feel that he had refuted anything or advanced his
cause the least by his words. The Deputation alone
had the privilege of referring to the speeches and examining
them, and it belonged to the majority, not to
the Council; <q>how it was formed, we know.</q> As a
tribunal the Council was bound to institute a calm and
searching investigation of facts, tradition and testimonies,
and for this only one means was available,
which was employed at the former great Councils including
the Tridentine, to form deputations from both
parties for earnest conference, where scientific examination
might take the place of rhetorical harangues&mdash;from
both parties, for it was idle with Bilio to bid them
ignore the existence of two parties. <q>Modo in hôc
Concilio fit aliter et illud ineptissime,</q> he concluded,
<pb n='724'/><anchor id='Pg724'/>
and he proposed the formula, <q>Magisterium universalis
Ecclesiæ est infallibile.</q>
</p>

<p>
The next speech, of Vitelleschi, who is Archbishop
of Osimo but has never been in his diocese, though it
is so near, left no impression; it was an exhortation to
vote infallibility unanimously. And then followed
Archbishop Conolly of Halifax with a speech such as
has seldom been heard here. <q>Thrice,</q> he said, <q>have
I asked for proof from Scripture according to its
authentic interpretation, from Tradition and from
Councils, that the Bishops of the Catholic Church ought
to be excluded from the definition of dogmas; but my
request has not been complied with, and now I adjure
you, like the blind man on the way to Jericho, to give
us sight that we may believe. Hitherto we have recognised
the strongest motive for the credibility of
Catholic doctrine in the general consent of the Church
notified through the collective episcopate; this has been
our shield against all external assailants, and by this
powerful magnet we have drawn hundreds of thousands
into the Church. Is this our invincible weapon of
attack and defence now to be broken and trampled
under foot, and the thousand-headed episcopate with the
millions of faithful at its back to shrink into the
<pb n='725'/><anchor id='Pg725'/>
voice and witness of a single man? Let the Deputation
prove to us that it has really been always the
belief of the Church that the Pope is everything and
the Bishops nothing. The Council of Jerusalem did
not adopt the formula of Peter but of John, who spoke
before him, and in the Apostles' Creed we do not say
<q>Credo in Petrum et successores ejus,</q> but <q>Credo in
unam Ecclesiam Catholicam.</q> We Bishops have no
right to renounce for ourselves and our successors the
hereditary and original rights of the episcopate, to renounce
the promise of Christ, <q>I am with you to the
end of the world.</q> But now they want to reduce us to
nullities, to tear the noblest jewel from our pontifical
breastplate, to deprive us of the highest prerogative of
our office, and to transform the whole Church and the
Bishops with it into a rabble of blind men, among
whom is one alone who sees, so that they must shut
their eyes and believe whatever he tells them.</q>
</p>

<p>
Was it confidence of victory that moved the Legates
to allow the bold and free-minded American, who
spoke with the full weight of a deep and laboriously
attained conviction, to bring these earnest words to a
close without interruption, after they had recently reduced
three of their own speakers in succession to
<pb n='726'/><anchor id='Pg726'/>
silence? I know not. It was the unenviable lot of
the Archbishop of Granada, Monzon y Martins Benvenuto,
to follow Conolly. No one expects at this
Council ideas or facts from a Spaniard, but merely bombast
and abject protestations of homage. Since they no
longer have Queen Isabella and the throne has been
vacant, these prelates have transferred their undivided
devotion to the Pope, and among the reptiles here they
are the most cringing after the Neapolitans. Monzon
said he thirsted for new dogmas, and the infallibility
of the Pope did not satisfy him; he earnestly desired a
second dogma, viz., the divine and inviolable nature of
the States of the Church.
</p>

<p>
It was reported two days ago that Cardinal Morichini,
who formerly as nuncio breathed some German air,
intends to speak in Guidi's sense, but since the scene
between the Pope and Guidi has become known, it is
generally thought that no Cardinal will be so foolhardy
as to express any other opinion in Council than that of
the inspired Pope. Meanwhile there are new speakers
enrolled, among whom are Haynald, Strossmayer, the
Bishops of Dijon, Constantine, Tarentaise, etc. The
number considerably exceeds a hundred, but Errington
has only too much reason for saying the debates are like
<pb n='727'/><anchor id='Pg727'/>
a boy riding a rocking-horse&mdash;movement without
advance.
</p>

<p>
You may imagine what capital the Jesuits make out
of the speech of the Dominican Guidi. They are the
supreme and thoroughly devoted body-guard of the
Roman See, and can alone be implicitly trusted. And
in fact nobody thinks it possible that a Jesuit should
speak in Council like Guidi, as neither does any one
here credit a Jesuit with sincere conviction of what he
says; it is always known beforehand what he will say
on any question, viz., what the Order considers for its
interest and imposes as a corporate doctrine on its individual
members. The sons of Ignatius remember now
that the Dominicans have never been trustworthy. As
early as 1303 the French appeal from Pope Boniface <hi rend='smallcaps'>viii.</hi>
to a General Council was supported by 130 Dominicans
at Paris, and at the Councils of Constance and
Basle they took the most active part in the measures
against papal omnipotence and in framing the mischievous
canons of the fourth and fifth sessions of Constance;
they joined Savonarola in opposing Alexander
<hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi> and preferred being burned to submitting. And
again they gave powerful aid in France to the establishment
of the Gallican doctrine. And what, say the
<pb n='728'/><anchor id='Pg728'/>
Jesuits, is the great Church history of the Dominican
Natalis Alexander but an arsenal from which to this
day the opponents of infallibility get their weapons?
</p>

<p>
Preparations are already being made for the festivities
which are to accompany the promulgation of the new
dogma. The Romans&mdash;the native population&mdash;cannot
understand why a part of the Bishops resist it so
stoutly, and no less mysterious to them is the fiery zeal
of foreigners, especially Frenchmen, in its favour. Their
view is that infallibility, as being likely to bring large
sums of money into Rome, is certainly a profitable and
praiseworthy affair, and they are accordingly ready for
noisy demonstrations of joy. Plenty of sky-rockets
will go up, there will be illuminations, the pillars of
the churches will be clothed in red damask according
to the local usage, and numberless wax-candles will be
burnt. Some enthusiasts think the fountain of Trevi
will that day flow with wine instead of water, and it is
hoped that at nightfall a transparency of the famous
picture painted by the Pope's command to represent
his infallibility will be shown to the faithful people.
And next time the French Veuillotists choose to cry
in the streets <q>Long live the infallible Pope!</q> some
Romans will join the cry.
</p>

<pb n='729'/><anchor id='Pg729'/>

<p>
The festivities will absorb large sums of money, and
the financiers are not without anxiety; for however
lucrative the new dogma may prove by and bye, for the
moment it is an unproductive capital, and the annual
deficit of thirty million franks cannot be covered by
promises of future prosperity. It has now been determined,
since the huge bankruptcy of Langrand-Dumonceaux,
who had been named a Roman Count, has
created some alarm, to take in the Rhenish and Westphalian
nobility with the ecclesiastical unions there as
sureties, and thus to negotiate a loan of twenty million
franks <q>al pari.</q> The noble presidents of the unions
are said to have already signified their willingness.
</p>

<p>
The rewards of those for whom there are no Cardinal's
hats are already under consideration. It is said that
about a hundred Bishops will be named <q>assistants at
the Pontifical Throne</q> in recognition of their services.
Others will be made <q>protonotarii apostolici,</q> most
of them only <q>protonotarii sopranumerarii non participanti.</q>
Several priests especially zealous for the good
cause will be made titular Bishops, and others <q>prelati
domestici</q> and <q>monsignori,</q> or <q>camerieri segreti,</q> etc.
Then there are the distinctions by means of colours,
and soon we shall be able to measure a man's zeal for
<pb n='730'/><anchor id='Pg730'/>
the new dogma at the first glance by seeing whether he
wears the <q>abito paonazzo</q> or violet or scarlet.
And there are exceptional decorations for use in church
kept in reserve, like what the Archbishop of Algiers
had given him.
</p>

<p>
The attitude of Ketteler creates astonishment and is
studied as a riddle to which no solution can be found.
The Pope said to-day, <q>Io non capisco, cosa vuole quel
Ketteler, che un giorno distribuisce delle brochure contro
di me e contro della mia infallibilità, e che il giorno
dopo scrive nei giornali che sia pieno di devozione per
me, e che crede alla mia infallibilità, pare che sia proprio
mezzo,</q> and thereupon he made a gesture indicating
that the Bishop of Mayence was not quite right in
his head.
</p>

<p>
In fact Ketteler is the only man here who perplexes
a reporter or historian. He has a work printed and distributed,
in which infallibility is declared to be an unscriptural
and unecclesiastical doctrine, and he says in
his attack on me that according to his view Scripture
and Tradition (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the two only sources for the
Church's faith) do not justify its dogmatic definition.
Yet he affirms that he was always an infallibilist
believer and will soon be more so than ever. It is
<pb n='731'/><anchor id='Pg731'/>
difficult to report on the performances of a theological
gymnast who seems rather to balance himself in mid
air than to have firm ground under his feet. Here it is
thought that he follows the counsel of his powerful
patrons in the German College and the Gesù, who have
made him understand that the new dogma will certainly
be proclaimed, and that he would do well to
change as speedily as he can from an inopportunist to
a zealous advocate and executor of the decree. He has
lately been reproached by an influential theologian
(Gass) with making his own Church worse than it is by
his doctrine that the Catholic Church knows of no duty
of obedience against conscience. It will certainly never
occur to me, now or at any future time, to have recourse
to the conscience of Bishop Ketteler; that would indeed
be the last refuge one would fly to!
</p>

</div>

<pb n='732'/><anchor id='Pg732'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixty-Second Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, June 30, 1870.</hi>&mdash;In the middle ages ecclesiastical
controversies were decided by the ordeal of the
cross. The representatives of both parties placed themselves
before a large cross, with their arms stretched
out in the form of a cross, and he whose arms first
sank, or who fell exhausted to the ground, was conquered.
The heat and the Roman fever have replaced
this ordeal at the Council. The process which is to
test the result has been going on for six weeks, and the
majority will evidently come out of it with flying colours.
It is composed chiefly of Italians and Spaniards
of both hemispheres, who can bear such things much
better than northerners, and as it is four times as numerous
as the minority, gaps made in its ranks by sickness
and death are soon filled up, and the phalanx remains
firmly closed, while the Opposition receives the news of the
sickness or departure of one of its members as heralding
<pb n='733'/><anchor id='Pg733'/>
its growing discouragement and final defeat. How well
the authorities understand the inestimable value of
this new ally, the heat and mephitic exhalations, is
shown by the laconic but significant words of the
papal journalist, Veuillot, in his 125th Letter on the
Council, <q>Et si la définition ne peut mûrir qu'au soleil,
eh bien, on grillera.</q> As before, so now again Roman
orthodoxy seems to have called fire to its aid, and for
Bishops, who do not wish to be roasted according to
Veuillot's wish, flight is the only alternative.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal Guidi has received the most peremptory
orders from the Pope to make a formal retractation of his
speech in Council. The form and occasion of making
it he may arrange with the Legates. He has already
had an interview with Bilio. The Pope has forbidden
him to receive visits, that he may be free to consider
without distraction the greatness of his error. Solitary
confinement is adopted in the penal legislation of other
countries too as an efficient instrument of reformation.
Guidi has told the Presidents that he is ready to
give an explanation of his speech in a public sitting, if
they will announce beforehand that he does so by the
Pope's desire; but he can make no retractation. Jandel,
the Dominican General, intends now to deliver a speech
<pb n='734'/><anchor id='Pg734'/>
in refutation of Guidi's theory, which has been composed
for him in the Gesù. Many think that Guidi will be
deterred from letting things come to extremities by the
terrible example of Cardinal Andrea, who was worried
to death. A Cardinal, who lives out of the Roman
States, may maintain a certain independence or even
opposition, as the precedent of Cardinal Noailles shows,
but in Rome this is impossible. As Archbishop of
Bologna Guidi would be under the protection of the
Italian Government, but thither he will never be allowed
to return.
</p>

<p>
Heat, fever and intrigues&mdash;this is a brief description
of the state of Rome, as regards the Council. The heat
and pestilential miasmas are unendurable for foreigners
from the north; already six French and four American
Bishops have been obliged to save their lives by departure,
and of those who stay in Rome a third are unable
from their bodily ailments to attend the sittings. A
Petition to the Pope is now in course of signature
praying for a prorogation, on account of the danger
to the lives of many foreign and aged prelates at this
season of the year. I give you the text, but will
observe that I hear most refuse to sign, some thinking
the case a hopeless one, others of very ill repute in the
<pb n='735'/><anchor id='Pg735'/>
Vatican fearing their adherence would only make it
more so. The Petition runs thus&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Beatissime Pater! Episcopi infrascripti, tam proprio
quam aliorum permultorum Patrum nomine a
benignitate S. V. reverenter, fiducialiter et enixe expostulant,
ut ea, quæ sequuntur, paterne dignetur
excipere:</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ad Patres in Concilio Lateranensi v. sedentes hoc
habebat, die <hi rend='smallcaps'>xvii.</hi> Junii, Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi> Papa <q>Quia jam temporis
dispositione ... concedimus</q> simulque Concilium
Pontifex ad tempus autumnale prorogabat.&mdash;Pejor certe
inpræsentiarum conditio nostra est. Calor æstivus, jam
desinente mense Junio, nimius est, et de die in diem
intolerabilior crescit; unde RR. Patrum, inter quos tot
seniores sunt, annorum pondere pressi, et laboribus confecti,
valetudo graviter periclitatur.&mdash;Timentur inprimis
febres, quibus magis obnoxii sunt extranei hujusce
temperiei regionis non assuefacti.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Quidquid vero tentaverit et feliciter perfecerit
liberalitas S. V., ut non paucis episcopis hospitia bona
præberentur, plerique tamen relegati sunt in habitationes
nimis augustas, sine aëre, calidissimas omninoque insalubres.
Unde jam plures episcopi ob infirmitatem
corporis abire coacti sunt, multi etiam Romæ infirmantur
<pb n='736'/><anchor id='Pg736'/>
et Concilio adesse nequeunt, ut patet ex tot sedibus
quæ in aulâ conciliari vacuæ apparent.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Antequam igitur magis ac magis creverit ægrotorum
numerus, quorum plures periculo hic occumbendi exponerentur,
instantissime postulamus, B. Pater, ut S. V.
aliquam Concilii suspensionem, quæ post festum S.
Petri convenienter inciperet, concedere dignetur.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Etenim, B. Pater, cum centum et viginti episcopi
nomen suum dederint, ut in tanti momenti quæstione
audiantur, evidens est, discussionem non posse intra
paucos dies præcipitari, nisi magno rerum ac pacis
religiosæ dispendio. Multo magis congruum esset
atque necessarium brevem aliquam, ob ingruentes gravissimos
æstatis calores, Concilio suspensionem dari.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Nova vero Synodi periodus ad primam diem mensis
Octobris forsitan indicari posset.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>S. V., si hoc, ut fidenter speramus, concesserit,
gratissimos sensus nobis populisque nostris excitabit,
utpote quæ gravissimæ omnium necessitati consuluerit.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pedes S. V. devote osculantes nosmet dicimus S. V.
humillimos et obsequentissimos famulos in Christo
filios.</q>
</p>

<p>
Attempts have already been made by word of mouth
to secure some compassion from the Pope for the severe
<pb n='737'/><anchor id='Pg737'/>
sufferings of the Bishops, but wholly in vain. His
comments on the members of the minority, if rightly
reported here, are so irritable and bitter that I scruple
to mention them. But I must relate what occurred
to-day at a farewell audience given to some Maltese
Knights, who had come to exercise their privilege of
keeping guard at an Œcumenical Council. The Pope
first turned to an English member of the Order and
wished him success in the scheme for introducing it
into England, and then expressed his sympathy for
that nation in his confident expectation of the speedy
and innumerable conversions promised by Manning,
adding the remark that the Italians were somewhat
volatile. And the mildness of the expression, compared
with former ebullitions of anger, proved that the
infallibilist line of the Italian Bishops had covered in
his eyes the political sins of the nation. But then he
turned to the Germans, who were present in the greatest
number, with the words, <q>I piu cattivi sono i Tedeschi,
sono i piu cattivi di tutti, lo spirito Tedesco a guastato
tutto.</q> Even that was not enough, but a Bohemian
knight who was present had to listen to a stream of invectives
against the conduct of Cardinal Schwarzenberg,
which made a very unpleasant impression on him.
<pb n='738'/><anchor id='Pg738'/>
As a French Bishop said to me to-day, it is a humiliating
spectacle to see a man who, at the very moment
when he is assimilating his office to the Godhead,
recklessly displays the little weaknesses and passions
which people are generally ashamed to expose to view.
</p>

<p>
It was clearly shown in the Congregations of 23d
and 25th June that the majority only continue to
tolerate the speeches of the Opposition as an almost
unendurable nuisance. Loud murmurs alternated with
the ringing of the Presidents' bell. When Bishop
Losanna of Biella, the senior of the Council, was speaking
against burdening the Christian world with the new
dogma, the Legate tried to ring him down. He entreated
that at least out of regard for his advanced age
they would let him finish the little he still had to say.
In vain. The Legate went on ringing and the Bishop
speaking, so that the assembly for some time was
regaled with a duet between a bell and an&mdash;of course
inaudible&mdash;human voice.
</p>

<p>
In the Congregation of the 23d Bishop Landriot of
Rheims made a long speech in the interests of mediation
and mutual concessions, which showed careful
study, but was received with every sign of displeasure
by the majority: he also proposed what Errington had
<pb n='739'/><anchor id='Pg739'/>
wanted, that a Commission formed from both parties
should examine the whole tradition on the subject and
report the result to the Council. At this cries of <q>Oho,
oho!</q> rose from the majority. Discouraged and intimidated
the Archbishop concluded with the declaration
that, if the Pope pleased to confirm the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, he
submitted by anticipation, at which the faces which had
grown black brightened up again and the apology for
the French Church which he ended with was condoned.
</p>

<p>
The most remarkable speeches in the sitting of 25th
June were those of the Bishop Legate of Trieste and
Ketteler of Mayence. The first had the courage to say
plainly that the manipulation of Scripture texts, which
were pressed into the service of the new dogma in
glaring contradiction to the authentic interpretation of
the Church, was a sin. Ketteler's speech created the
greatest sensation from its decided tone, and its not
betraying the contradiction in which he seems to find
himself involved after his public declarations in Germany.
I must indeed reckon on my report again
displeasing and angering him, for this <q>mobile ingegno
usato ad amar e a disamar in un punto</q> is wont to
take it very ill if his bold transitions do not leave the
same impression on others which floats before his own
<pb n='740'/><anchor id='Pg740'/>
memory. But I will fulfil my duty as historian of the
Council in spite of this. Ketteler urged that nobody
had alleged any clear evidence for a personal and
separate infallibility of the Pope being really contained
in Scripture, Tradition and the consciousness of all
Churches; it was only the opinion of a certain school&mdash;<q>placita
cujusdam scholæ</q> he repeated several times
emphatically. The Pope certainly had the right of
proscribing doctrines which contradicted the dogmas
already decided by the Church, but by no means the
totally different right of formulating a new dogma without
the consent of the episcopate. It was the greatest
absurdity to believe or say <q>Pontificem in pectoris sui
scrinio omnem traditionem repositam et infusam habere.</q>
At these words murmurs arose in the assembly;
all had shortly before heard and repeated to one another
the Pope's assertion, <q>La tradizione son' io.</q> Then
Ketteler attacked the theory of Cardinal Cajetan, the
well-known first opponent of Luther, that Peter alone
among the Apostles had a <q>potestas ordinaria</q> to
be transmitted to his successors, while the <q>potestas
specialis</q> conferred by Christ on the rest expired at
their death, so that the Bishops are not successors of
the Apostles but derive all their authority from the
<pb n='741'/><anchor id='Pg741'/>
Pope. This mischievous system had been adopted by a
certain school, and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> before them was drawn up
in accordance with it and in contradiction to all Catholic
tradition. It placed the Bishops in the same relation
to the Pope as priests occupied towards Bishops, which
was unheard of. He protested against the whole system,
and desired that in every dogmatic decree Holy
Scripture and Tradition should be taken full account
of: the Pope needed the co-operation of the Bishops as
representatives of tradition. It was utterly wrong to
believe that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>depositum fidei</foreign> was committed to the
Pope alone.
</p>

<p>
If the force and clearness of Ketteler's speech evoked
deep and serious reflection, an amusing episode occurred
at the close of the sitting. The Irish Bishop Keane of
Cloyne ascended the tribune. There is a story told of
a German city whose sapient councillors carried the sunlight
out of the street in sacks to light their town-hall,
which had no windows; and so Keane informed his
hearers that St. Peter brought the whole body of tradition
with him to Rome well stored up; here and here
alone it was still kept, and every Pope took what was
required from the stock which he possessed as a whole
genuine and entire.
</p>

<pb n='742'/><anchor id='Pg742'/>

<p>
Those who wish to prosecute psychological and
ethical studies should come to Rome. Here they may
observe how the three great powers of the world, as St.
Augustine calls them, <q>Errores, amores, terrores,</q> work
together in full harmony and activity; the last especially
will aid the victory of the first&mdash;for how long
He only knows who rules the destiny of man.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='743'/><anchor id='Pg743'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixty-Third Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, July 2, 1870.</hi>&mdash;The Pope's reported answer
to those who spoke to him of the sufferings of the
Bishops and their danger of death, and the consequent
need for proroguing the Council, is passing from mouth
to mouth. I should consider it a sin to publish it.
Were it true, one would have to treat the man who
could so speak as the Orsini treated Boniface viii. in
his last days. If it is not true, it is very remarkable
that the Romans have no hesitation in circulating it
and really credit their Pope with it. This and the
disdain bordering on simple contempt with which the
Romans look down on the Bishops are among the
indelible impressions they will take back with them
over the Alps.
</p>

<p>
In the sitting of 28th June Bishop Vitali of Ferentino
in the Roman States first inveighed against the long
speeches of the Bishops, and then broke into a dithyrambic
<pb n='744'/><anchor id='Pg744'/>
panegyric on his master, the Pope, who, like
the Emperor Titus, was the <q>deliciæ orbis terrarum.</q>
He was somewhat abruptly interrupted by the Legates
in the middle of his rhapsody. Ginoulhiac, Archbishop
of Lyons, who is the most learned member of the French
episcopate after Maret, next delivered an ably and
carefully composed speech, which was not interrupted.
He appealed to the words and example of former
Popes who had acknowledged&mdash;like <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Celestine <hi rend='smallcaps'>i.</hi> in
430&mdash;that they were not masters of the faith but only
guardians of the traditional doctrine, and that not singly
but in unison with all Churches and their Bishops, as
was clearly expressed in the decree. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>, strong
as was the pressure put upon him by France, delayed a
long time the issue of the decree against the civil Constitution
of the clergy of 1790, because, as he wrote to
the King, the Pope must first conscientiously ascertain
how the faithful will receive his decision. But a large
section of Catholics were not at all disposed to receive
this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and the decree would evidently evoke the
bitterest hostility to the Church where it did not already
exist, and immensely increase it where it did. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>vi.</hi>
then said that, if the Roman See, the centre of the
Church, lost its authority through exaggerating its claims,
<pb n='745'/><anchor id='Pg745'/>
all was lost. Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi> should take care that this doctrine
did not become a snare to innumerable Catholics. He
concluded by commending the formula of St. Antoninus,
which requires the consent of the episcopate.
</p>

<p>
In the sitting of 30th June a member of the almost
extinct third party among the French, Sergent, Bishop
of Quimper or Cornouailles, came forward. He proposed
adding to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, which might then be
accepted, words requiring the co-operation for decisions
on faith of the <q>episcopi, sive dispersi sive in Concilio
congregati.</q> But he insisted on the superiority of the
Pope to a Council according to the decree of Leo. <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>,&mdash;or,
as he said, the fifth Lateran Council, and defended the
order of business imposed on this Council by Pius <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix.</hi>
But here he touched on a very sore place; the Bishops
sit here under the continual conviction of having their
hands tied in an illegitimate and tyrannical fashion, and
knowing that the order of business is in direct contradiction
to the independence of the ancient Councils.
The Legates must have felt that the Opposition would
say, <q>Hæc excusatio est accusatio,</q> and that it would
give the requisite handle for again renewing their written
protests by word of mouth now at the decisive moment.
Sergent was therefore called to order.
</p>

<pb n='746'/><anchor id='Pg746'/>

<p>
After the Bishop of Aversa, who spoke as an ordinary
infallibilist, Bishop Martin of Paderborn came forward
and created a sensation. A German infallibilist, like
Martin, who was not kneaded and dressed in the Jesuit
school, is an interesting and curious phenomenon of itself,
and produces somewhat the same impression as an
European who voluntarily lives among savages and
adopts their language and customs. But Bishop Martin's
appearance was remarkable on other grounds also.
It was long since any one had been heard in the
Council who spoke in so angry a tone and with such
noise and visible endeavour to supplement his stammering
utterance by the action of hands and feet. It was
a difficult labour that Martin achieved, like a singer
drowning his own voice, and doubly meritorious in these
melting days. And here I may make a remark that
should have been made before: the Hall has really
gained lately in acoustic qualities, from having an awning
stretched over it which acts as a sounding-board.
</p>

<p>
Martin shouted into the Hall that the personal infallibility
of every Pope was inseparable from the primacy,
for the Pope was the supreme legislator, and therefore
he must of necessity be divinely preserved from all error.
The Bishops of the minority were amazed at this statement,
for none of them had expected a German Bishop
<pb n='747'/><anchor id='Pg747'/>
to declare the whole code of the Inquisition, as promulgated
by the Popes from Innocent <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> to Paul <hi rend='smallcaps'>v.</hi>, infallible
and inspired. But there was still better behind.
Two German witnesses for infallibility were cited, Dr.
Luther, on account of his letter to the Pope in 1518,
and Dr. Pichler of 1870. Up to 1763 all Germans
were stanch infallibilists, but then Febronianism came
in and for a time obscured this light of pure doctrine,
which had previously shone so bright in Catholic
Germany. But an orthodox reaction had followed,
thanks to the excellent catechism of the Jesuit Deharbe,
the Provincial Synod of Cologne and several Pastorals.
Martin then referred to Döllinger, and reproached him
with having in his earlier works&mdash;which were not named&mdash;taught
papal infallibility, whereas he now assailed it.
The Bishop, who is a member of the Deputation, then
proposed a formula he had devised, <q>Traditioni inhærentes
docemus Pontificem, cum universalem Ecclesiam
docet, vi divinæ assistentiæ errare non posse.</q> But
that was not enough, without smiting down the opponents
of the doctrine by a solemn anathema, as follows,
<q>Si quis dixerit non nisi accedente consensu Episcoporum
Romanum Pontificem errare non posse, anathema
sit.</q> He moreover agreed with Spalding and Dechamps
that parish priests and others having cure of souls
<pb n='748'/><anchor id='Pg748'/>
should be required by a special admonition addressed
to them to impress this doctrine of infallibility on their
people often and emphatically from the pulpit.
</p>

<p>
The speech was delivered in the tone and manner of
a confessor dealing with a hardened sinner in his last
moments, and the Germans, from whose ranks the speaker
had issued,&mdash;men like Rauscher, Haynald, Strossmayer,
Hefele&mdash;sat shamefaced with their eyes on the ground,
while the delight of the Italians and Spaniards could
be read on their countenances at this humiliation of
the nation which prides itself on the superior culture
of its clergy. But they were surprised at Martin's
concluding declaration that no doubt in Germany great
dangers for the Church would follow from the promulgation
of the doctrine. It was mentioned in the Council
Hall that, in a widely circulated school-book which
had passed through eleven or twelve editions, Martin
had taught the exact reverse of the doctrine he now so
noisily and peremptorily maintained; but then it was
observed in excuse for him that the heterodoxies of this
book, though it bore his name, were no fault of his, as
he had simply transcribed it from the papers of the late
Professor Diekhoff, which were left in his charge.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='749'/><anchor id='Pg749'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Letter_LXIV'/>
<head>Sixty-Fourth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, July 5, 1870.</hi>&mdash;Rome is an excellent school
for Bishops; a course of seven months at the Council
produces wonderful results. One illusion after another
is laid aside and an insight gained into the working of
the huge machine and the forces that put it in motion,
and the Bishops learn at last, though it be laboriously
and not without tears, why they were summoned and
what services alone are demanded of them. The historian
Pachymeres relates that, when the people of Constantinople
demanded a Council in 1282 in order to
judge the unionist Patriarch, Bekkus, Bishop Theoktistus
of Adrianople said that they treated Bishops like
wooden spits on which Bekkus might be roasted, and
which might then be thrown into the fire.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pachym.</hi> II. 20, ed. Bonn.</note> A very
similar feeling has come over many Bishops here;
they know that if they say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign> at last, they will
be cast into the fire, after they have helped by their
<pb n='750'/><anchor id='Pg750'/>
reluctant practical recognition of both the first and
second order of business&mdash;destructive as both are to all
real freedom&mdash;to forge the new spiritual yoke. And
then they find their schoolroom a very narrow and
uncomfortable one, and have at last discovered that
it looks very like a prison cell.
</p>

<p>
It is but a game of moves and counter-moves as on a
chessboard, only that no one dares to incur the penalty
of high treason by saying <q>Check to the king,</q> or lifting
a finger for such an audacious move. The minority
were so confounded and irritated by the abrupt closing
of the general debate, because they hoped to prolong it
till prorogation became inevitable. For nobody doubted
in April and May that this would follow at the end of
June, and the notion was sedulously fostered by the
official staff of the Council&mdash;the Legates and Secretary
Fessler&mdash;and by the Pope himself. It is not long since
Pius said to a French Bishop, <q>It would be barbarity
on my part to want to keep the Bishops here in July.</q>
And thus the Opposition, whenever they were shaken
and disturbed by some violent act, let matters be
hushed up and never gave any practical effect to their
protests and complaints. But now the Court party say
that it would indeed be tyrannical cruelty to keep us
<pb n='751'/><anchor id='Pg751'/>
here, under ordinary circumstances, imprisoned in this
furnace full of fevers, but it is justified by the abnormal
situation. The grand and saving act of the infallibilist
definition, which is to quicken the whole Church with
new powers of life and introduce the golden age of
absolute ecclesiastical dominion, cannot any longer be
held in suspense. <q>You surely will not wish,</q> said
Cardinal de Angelis to a Bishop who was urging the
necessity of a prorogation, <q>that the Pope, after spending
so many thousand scudi on the Bishops, should
now be left alone in the Vatican without any recompense.</q>
And Antonelli thinks the Bishops have only
themselves to blame for their present suffering condition;
why have they wasted so much time in speeches?
</p>

<p>
Since that shocking saying of the Pope's, which I
referred to in my last letter, has became known here,
the Bishops have abandoned as hopeless the design of
making a direct appeal to him for the prorogation of
the Council on the score of the health and lives of
its members. And this conviction has been further
strengthened by the insolence of the Court theologian,
Louis Veuillot. <q>Let yourselves be roasted, since it is
only through this fiery ordeal that the precious wine
of infallibility can be matured,</q> he exclaims to them,
<pb n='752'/><anchor id='Pg752'/>
and they know now that they are inside a door over
which the inscription is written
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q>Lasciate ogni speranza voi ch' intrate.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And now there is a new cause of alarm. It is said&mdash;perhaps
the report is spread on purpose&mdash;that at last
no Bishop will be allowed to depart till he has signed a
bond laid before him declaring his entire and unconditional
submission. We actually hear that, by a recent
decision, leave of absence is only to be given to the
Bishops in case of serious illness, that is, when they are
no longer equal to the journey. Several prelates therefore
have already inquired of the ambassadors of their
Governments, what means of protection they could
afford them in case of such violence being exercised.
The ambassadors will be obliged to write home for
further instructions, as it seems no such case had been
foreseen as possible to occur. But so many astonishing
and seemingly impossible things have happened
during the last seven months that such an act would
no longer excite even any particular surprise.
</p>

<p>
Guidi still appears in Council and shows himself in
his votes an independent thinker and by no means a
humiliated or broken man, but in his convent he is
guarded like a prisoner and constantly urged by threats
<pb n='753'/><anchor id='Pg753'/>
and persuasions to recant. When a remark was made
to the Pope about his harsh treatment of this man, who
still as Cardinal shares the numerous privileges of his
order, he is reported to have said, <q>I summoned him,
not as Cardinal, but as brother Guidi, whom I lifted
out of the dust.</q> Guidi had drawn great displeasure
on himself before by joining Cardinals Corsi and Riario
Sforza in making representations to the Pope against the
alteration introduced by his order in the sequence of the
subjects for discussion, by which means the infallibilist
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was interpolated before its time. He lived in
the Minerva with certain Bishops of his Order, Milella,
Pastero, Alcazar and Manucillo, and their mutual conferences
led to the matured conviction that the personal
infallibility of the Pope is a novel doctrine, of late
invention and unknown even to the great Thomas
and the Thomist school, chiefly introduced in substance
by the Jesuits. Guidi appeals to the fact that years
ago he has taught this at Vienna, as was or easily
might have been known. If he keeps firm, and Cardinal
Silvestri, who often votes with the Opposition,
joins their side in good earnest&mdash;five dissentient Cardinals,
including Mathieu, Rauscher and Schwarzenberg&mdash;more
Italian Bishops than the Court would like, may
<pb n='754'/><anchor id='Pg754'/>
say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>. It is already remarked that they
earnestly inquire among themselves whether the German
and French minority are likely to remain firm at
the decisive moment and not melt away, in which case
they would be ready to vote with them. You may
imagine how intensely Guidi is hated here. For the
moment he might make O'Connell's boast his own when
he said he was <q>the best abused man in the British
Empire.</q> What Persius said is equally true of the
clerical <q>turba Remi</q> now,&mdash;<q>sequitur fortunam ut
semper, et odit damnatos.</q> I may mention in illustration
of the view prevalent among the majority, that
Manning the other day told one of the most illustrious
Bishops of the minority he had no further business in
the Catholic Church and had better leave it. Even in
the Council Hall Bishop Gastaldi of Saluzzo exclaimed
to the minority that they were already blotted out of
the book of life.
</p>

<p>
The internal history of the minority since the end of
June consists mainly of their endeavours to avert the
departure of the timid and home-sick and those attacked
by fever. Hitherto leave has been given them readily
enough when asked, but it is said this will not be so
for the future. The Prince Bishop of Breslau, Förster,
<pb n='755'/><anchor id='Pg755'/>
was urgently entreated to remain, and he seemed to be
persuaded, but now he is gone,<note place='foot'>According to a letter of his which reached Breslau the 12th July, permission
to depart has been refused him.</note> and so are Purcell of
Cincinnati, Vancsa, Archbishop of Fogaras, Greith of
St. Gall, and others&mdash;a serious loss under present circumstances.
The feeling of self-preservation at last
overpowers every other; and what answer can be given
to a man who says, when required to stay and help to
save the truth, <q>If I am ill in bed with fever on the
critical day, my vote is lost</q>? Moreover the burning
atmosphere peculiar to Rome, impregnated with exhalations
from the Pontine marshes, oppresses and enervates
mind as well as body and cripples the energy of the
will.
</p>

<p>
So on the 1st July an understanding was arrived at
among the Opposition Bishops. It was felt more and
more clearly that to go on with the speeches was a
sterile and dreary business. For one solid and thoughtful
speech from, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Darboy, Strossmayer, Haynald,
Guidi, Dupanloup, Ginoulhiac, Ketteler or Maret, one
had to listen for long hours to the effusions of Spanish,
Sicilian and Calabrian infallibilists, and the speeches
of this party sound as if their authors had first studied
<pb n='756'/><anchor id='Pg756'/>
the dedicatory epistles to the Popes which the Jesuits
prefix to their works, and strung together the sonorous
phrases contained in them. Moreover the conduct of
the Legates had become palpable partisanship. For
several days they offered demonstrative thanks to every
speaker who gave up his turn; the bitterest attacks
of the majority on their opponents passed unrebuked,
and the murmurs and signs of impatience whenever
infallibility was called in question grew more and more
pronounced. It became evident that there was nothing
really to be gained by prolonging the speeches, when
all hope of getting the Council prorogued had to be
abandoned.
</p>

<p>
At the sitting of July 2 the affair was to have been
brought to a settlement. The minority had sketched
out a notice in the Council Hall, stating that all
speakers on their side withdrew, and handed it to
Cardinal Mathieu to communicate to the French, but
they declined to accept it, saying every one should be
free to decide for himself. And so, on that day, out of
twenty-two Fathers only four spoke, including Meignan
of Chalons and Ramadie of Perpignan.
</p>

<p>
But it soon became irresistibly evident to both
parties that it was advisable for them to put an end to
<pb n='757'/><anchor id='Pg757'/>
the oratorical exercises. The Legates had frequently
used the formula of the Index when a speaker gave up
his turn, saying, <q>laudabiliter orationi renunciavit,</q> or
<q>magnas ipsi agimus gratias.</q> The majority had two
reasons for wanting the speeches to go on&mdash;first the
wish of particular individuals to signalize themselves
and lay up a stock of merits deserving reward; and
secondly, that the Northern Bishops might succumb to
the rays of the July sun, as Homer's Achæans sunk
under the arrows of Apollo. But they were made to
understand that the Pope would account their simple
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>, sans phrase</q> a sufficient service, and reward
it according to their wish.
</p>

<p>
Moreover they felt secure about the eventual attitude
of the minority, or at least a considerable portion of them,
for it was known that two German Bishops had said,
<q>We shall resist to the last moment, but then we shall
submit, for we don't wish to cause a schism.</q> This
gave great joy to the Court party. I heard a monsignore
say, <q>These are our best friends, more so than those
who already vote for and with us, for their coming over
at the critical moment can only be ascribed to the
triumphant and irresistible power of the Holy Ghost
poured out through the Pope upon the Council; each
<pb n='758'/><anchor id='Pg758'/>
of them is a Saul converted into a Paul, who has found
his Damascus here at Rome, and becomes a living trophy
of the vice-godship of the Pope and the legitimacy and
œcumenicity of this Council. We can desire nothing
better for our cause than these late and sudden conversions.</q>
And thus at last an understanding satisfactory
to all parties was come to; on July 4 all the speakers
enrolled withdrew, only reserving their right of presenting
their observations in writing to the Deputation.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='759'/><anchor id='Pg759'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Letter_LXV'/>
<head>Sixty-Fifth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, July 7, 1870.</hi>&mdash;I must go back a few days and
tell you something more of the speeches made since St.
Peter's Day. It is for the interest of the contemporary
world and of posterity that the Roman system of hushing
up and deathlike silence should not be fully carried
out, and that it should be known what truths have
been uttered and what grounds alleged against the fatal
decision of the majority and rejected by them.
</p>

<p>
Soon after Bishop Martin a man spoke who had
gained the highest respect from all quarters, Verot,
Bishop of Savannah, a really apostolical character, compared
in America with St. Francis of Sales. On a
former occasion, on June 15, he had pointedly criticised
the conduct of the Court party and the attempt to surrender
all that yet remains of the ancient constitution
of the Church to a centralized papal absolutism. <q>If,</q>
he said, <q>the Pope wants to possess and exercise a
direct and immediate jurisdiction in my diocese, only
<pb n='760'/><anchor id='Pg760'/>
let him come over to America himself, and bring with
him plenty of the priests who are so abundant here to
my country where there are so few; gladly will I
attend him servant and observe how he, riding
about in my huge diocese, judges and arranges everything
on the spot.</q> And, as some Bishops of the majority
had given out the favourite Roman watchword, that
historical facts must yield to the clearness and <foreign rend='italic'>a priori</foreign>
certainty of doctrine, Verot replied briefly, <q>To me an
ounce of historical facts outweighs a thousand pounds of
your theories.</q> This time he was not interrupted, as he
had always been before,&mdash;by most no doubt not understood.
Maret too, in the sitting of July 1, attacked the
projected absolutism which the Church was now to be
saddled with. In the political world, he said, it is done
away with and disappears more and more under a
common feeling of repugnance, and now it is for the
first time to be confirmed in the Church, and Christians,
<q>the children of heavenly freedom,</q> are to be reduced,
after the protection afforded by the consent of the episcopate
is abolished, to spiritual slavery, and forced into
blind subjection to the dictates of a single man. He
said this in more courteous language than this brief
epitome gives scope for.
</p>

<pb n='761'/><anchor id='Pg761'/>

<p>
Among the most important speeches was that which
followed, of Bishop David of Saint Brieuc in Bretagne.
It was one of the speeches of a kind I said in an
early letter would not be tolerated, the result has refuted
me. The Bishop said that the proposed article of
faith was first invented in the fifteenth century, when a
new form, different from that ordained by Christ, was
given to the Church, at the expense of the inalienable
rights both of the Bishops and the faithful. If the
hypothesis of papal infallibility really belonged to the
deposit of faith, it must have been defined and universally
acknowledged in the earliest ages, as it would
evidently be a fundamental doctrine indispensable for
the whole Church. The parallel drawn between this and
the lately defined and previously undetermined and open
doctrine of the Immaculate Conception is quite irrelevant.
It is clearly evident, he added, that this new attempt to
exalt the Papacy will produce the same disturbance as
the earlier one in the sixteenth century. A sign of it
is the sudden and rapidly growing alienation of the
French clergy from their Bishops, which is instigated
from a distance. Passing on to a vindication of the
much abused Gallican doctrine, he showed that the
former Popes themselves declared it to be allowable and
<pb n='762'/><anchor id='Pg762'/>
only reprobated the attempt to make it into a special
and separate rule of faith for the French Church alone.
</p>

<p>
The Spanish Bishop of Cuenca, Payà-y-Rico, followed,
and began by affirming in the bragging and bombastic
style of his country, that in Spain the infallibilist doctrine
had always prevailed. This was a glaring falsehood;
it would have been enough to cite against him
the names of Tostado, Escobar, Victoria, and others, the
Spanish Bishops and theologians at Trent, and the fact
that the Inquisition first made the doctrine dominant in
Spain. But immediate replies are not permitted in the
Council Hall, and the majority were so charmed with his
disclosures that they loudly applauded him. Encouraged
by this he turned round upon the Opposition, observing
that a short interval was still allowed them to come
over to the majority, and that, unless they made a good
use of it, their only choice lay between a subsequent
meritorious submission or condemnation for heresy.
</p>

<p>
The minority, who meet daily either in national or
international conferences, were engaged in drawing up
a formula requiring the consent of the episcopate as
indispensable, but soon gave this up and resolved to
abstain from any demonstration, as they could gain
nothing by it. Several thought this would compel the
<pb n='763'/><anchor id='Pg763'/>
majority, if they really wanted to gain the concurrence
of the Opposition, to make proposals on their side for
some tolerable formula. But at present that is highly
improbable.
</p>

<p>
In the sitting of July 5, where the only business was
to vote on the third chapter, in consequence of the
general withdrawal of the speakers, an unexpected
occurrence intervened. Some days before Bishop Martin
of Paderborn had proposed in his own name and that
of some of his colleagues that in a Supplement, designated
as a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>monitum</foreign>, the doctrinal authority of the
Bishops should be mentioned, but only incidentally and
in a sense compatible with the Pope's prerogative of personal
infallibility. When the Pope heard of this, he was
much displeased, and peremptorily ordered that a canon
should be laid before the Council for acceptance enouncing
emphatically and under anathema the papal omnipotence
over the whole Church. The Deputation had
already had the third canon printed and distributed in
the following amended form:&mdash;<q>Si quis dixerit, Romani
Pontificis Primatum esse tantum officium inspectionis
et directionis et supremam ipsius potestatem
jurisdictionis in universam Ecclesiam non esse plenam,
sed tantum extraordinariam et mediatam&mdash;anathema
<pb n='764'/><anchor id='Pg764'/>
sit.</q> But in order to carry out the Pope's command,
the Bishop of Rovigo, as a member of the Deputation,
read the canon in a more stringent form, which in fact
left the extremest absolutist nothing to desire, but
which was not in the printed text and was either not
heard or not understood by the greater part of the
Bishops, while yet it was to be voted on on the spot&mdash;in
contradiction to the distinct directions of the order
of business. This more stringent version of the canon
runs thus:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Si quis dixerit, Romanum Pontificem habere tantummodo
officium inspectionis vel directionis, non
autem plenam et supremam potestatem jurisdictionis
in universam Ecclesiam, tum in rebus, quæ ad fidem et
mores, tum quæ ad disciplinam et regimen Ecclesiæ per
totum orbem diffusæ pertinent; aut eum habere tantum
potiores partes, non vero totam plenitudinem hujus
supremæ potestatis; aut hanc ejus potestatem non esse
ordinariam et immediatam sive in omnes ac singulas
Ecclesias, sive in omnes et singulos pastores et fideles&mdash;anathema
sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
A more shameless outwitting of a Council has never
been attempted. Archbishop Darboy at once rose and
protested against this juggling manœuvre, and the
<pb n='765'/><anchor id='Pg765'/>
Legates were obliged, humiliating as it was for them, to
let the matter drop for the present; but the addition
will be brought forward again in a few days.
</p>

<p>
A proof has lately forced itself on my attention of
the confusion of mind habitual to many of the Bishops
of the majority. I asked one of them, who had expressed
his surprise that so much fuss was made about
this one dogma, whether he had formed any clear conception
of its retrospective force and examined all the
papal decisions, from Siricius in 385 to the Syllabus of
1864, which would be made by the infallibilist dogma
into articles of faith. And it came out that this pastor
of above a hundred thousand souls imagined that every
Pope would be declared infallible, not for the past but
for the future only!<note place='foot'>[The same strange confusion of thought seems still to prevail among
some fervid infallibilists of the English and Irish Episcopate, to judge from
their pastorals issued since the decree of July 18.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> But he was somewhat perplexed
when I mentioned to him on the spur of the moment
merely a couple of papal maxims on moral theology,
which were now to be stamped with the seal of divinely
inspired truths.
</p>

<p>
On Saturday the 9th the special voting is to take
place on the emendation just mentioned of the third
chapter of the third canon in the interests of papal
<pb n='766'/><anchor id='Pg766'/>
absolutism, and on the same day or Monday the whole
of the third chapter and the amendments on the fourth
are to be voted on; on Wednesday, the 13th, the votes
are to be taken on the whole <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> <q>en bloc.</q> As
yet the Opposition can still be reckoned at 97, exclusive
of Guidi and the Dominican Bishops, who may not
improbably come to its aid at the critical moment.
</p>

<p>
One of the witticisms circulating here, for which the
Council affords matter to genuine Romans, is the following,
that in the sitting of July 4 there was a great
uproar among the Bishops, they were all set by the ears
and the Pope himself ran away, and why all this?
<q>E perchè tutta questa cagniara? perchè il Papa vuole
esser <emph>impeccabile</emph>, e i vescovi non lo vogliono.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='767'/><anchor id='Pg767'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixty-Sixth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, July 14, 1870.</hi>&mdash;I must again interrupt my
narrative of the occurrences and speeches between June
5 and 10 to communicate the details of the great event
of the session of July 13&mdash;an event which has falsified
all expectations on both sides, and created a sensation
and astonishment in Rome which it will take people
some time to recover from. Even beyond the Alps, in
spite of the all-absorbing question of the war, it will
rouse interest and joyful surprise. In the last few
days before the critical morning of the 13th there was
much discussion among the Bishops of the various
nations as to whether they should vote a simple <q>No</q>
or a conditional <q>Yes,</q>&mdash;a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign> or a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet juxta
modum</foreign>. It was not merely the fourth chapter that was
in question, which deals with infallibility, but the
whole <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on the Papacy, which contains also the
<pb n='768'/><anchor id='Pg768'/>
much-decried third canon of the third chapter, establishing
for the first time the theory of the universal
episcopate of the Pope, the very theory Pope Gregory the
Great characterized as an abomination and a blasphemy.
It was known that the Bishops who are mere dilettantis
in theology&mdash;and their number is legion, as is natural
under the present system of episcopal appointments&mdash;would
greatly prefer voting <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign>, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, with a conditioned
<q>Yes.</q> That would always leave them free to
reserve their further decision till the public voting <q>coram
Sanctissimo</q> (as the Pope is here called), when only a
direct <q>Yes</q> or <q>No</q> can be voted. Each of them
could present in writing the conditions or wishes on
which he desired to make his <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> dependent, and
then say <q>Yes</q> or <q>No</q> according to his pleasure in
the Solemn Session, if his suggestions were disregarded&mdash;<q>Yes,</q>
if he wished to direct the lightning flashes of
the angry Jupiter to other heads than his own; <q>No,</q>
if he could summon manliness and courage enough at
the last moment. The Court party and the majority
had neglected no means of impressing on the recalcitrants
the uselessness of their negative votes and the
personal disadvantages to themselves. Every one was
told, <q>It is determined irrevocably to take no account
<pb n='769'/><anchor id='Pg769'/>
of your <q>No,</q> and to go on to the promulgation of the
dogma. Supported by at least 500 favourable votes,
and throwing the surplus weight of his own vote into
the scale, the Pope, on the 17th or 24th July, will
walk over your heads amid the presumed acclamations
of the whole Catholic world; and how lamentable and
hopeless a situation will yours be then! You are then
heretics, who have incurred the terrible penalties of the
canon law; you have surrendered at discretion, bound
hand and foot, to the mercy of the deeply injured Pope.
Consider, <q>Quid sum miser tunc dicturus, quem patronum
rogaturus?</q></q>
</p>

<p>
Thus they were worked on individually. And more
drastic methods were employed as well. It was asserted
that two documents had already been drawn up in the
Vatican, which every Bishop would be compelled to sign
before being allowed to leave Rome; the one a profession
of faith comprising the new article of infallibility, and
the other an attestation of the perfect freedom of the
Council throughout its whole course. Whoever refused
to sign either would thereby at once incur papal censures.
<q>We shall thus have,</q> they were told, <q>your <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>
and your <q>free</q> acknowledgment under your hand of
the article of faith you denied a few days before, and
<pb n='770'/><anchor id='Pg770'/>
shall show it to the world. Do you wish then morally
to annihilate yourselves in public opinion?</q>
</p>

<p>
As the Bishops who are resolved to give a negative
vote knew well the more timorous temper of many of
their colleagues, who were half-ready to be persuaded
and half-ready to succumb, and remembered the Scriptural
saying that <q>a high priest must have compassion
on our infirmities,</q> some of them drew up a formula
stating the basis on which the timid might vote <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet
juxta modum</foreign>. In the preamble of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> the word
<q>principium</q> was to be exchanged for <q>exordium,</q>
and instead of <q>vis et virtus in eo (Papâ) consistit,</q> was
to be put <q>præcipue in eo consistit;</q> the third canon
of the third chapter was to be wholly omitted, and the
word <q>episcopalis</q> left out of the chapter, and lastly,
the formula of St. Antoninus was to be substituted for
the fourth chapter. The proposed document ends with
<q>Secus in Solemni Sessione dicturus sum, <emph>Non placet</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
On July 12 the Bishops of the minority held the
most largely attended international conference which
has yet taken place; about 70 were present. Three prelates,
two German and one French&mdash;Ketteler, Melchers
and Archbishop Landriot of Rheims&mdash;proposed that all
should vote <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet juxta modum</foreign>, but at the same time
<pb n='771'/><anchor id='Pg771'/>
hand in a precise and decided formulas the condition
of their assent, with a declaration that, if their demands
were rejected or inadequately complied with, they
should be obliged to vote <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign> in the Solemn
Session. This would have substantially secured the
complete victory of the majority and the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>. Every
one would have naturally said, <q>Your <q>Yes,</q> however
conditioned, can only bear the sense that in the main
point you agree with the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and that main point
lies in the two new and great articles of faith, which
hang together and must shape the future of the Church,
the universal episcopate of the Pope and his infallibility.
By saying <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> you affirm these two new
dogmas, and after that it will matter little what particular
collateral wishes or conditions you may choose to
add. Whether they are acceded to or not, you must in
consistency say <q>Yes</q> on the great day of the public
profession, when only a simple affirmative or negative
vote can be given.</q>
</p>

<p>
The three Cardinals, the two primates Simor and
Ginoulhiac, Strossmayer and others, spoke out repeatedly
and emphatically against this mischievous proposal
which would at the last moment have frustrated all
their hopes, and annihilated the results of seven months'
<pb n='772'/><anchor id='Pg772'/>
sufferings and labours. A decisive impression was
produced by the remark of the Archbishop of Milan,
that there were many infallibilists who on various
grounds would vote conditionally, and this peculiar
kind of vote, which was better adapted to courtiers
than Bishops, had better be left to them. <q>The only
befitting course for us,</q> he said, <q>who are convinced of
the falsehood of the doctrine, is to say <q>No.</q></q> This
was unanimously accepted. Tarnoczy, who for some
time back has withdrawn from his German and Hungarian
colleagues, and votes regularly with the majority,
was not present. Cardinal Schwarzenberg said he
should be glad if one of the Cardinals voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>
before him, but if this did not happen he should be the
first, and should count it a distinction to stand at the
head of this noble band.
</p>

<p>
It was remarkable how generally the view prevailed
that scarcely ten opposing votes would really be given
when the time came. No means were spared, by
rumours and inventions, to spread terror and despair
among the ranks of the Opposition. Thus the report
was circulated in foreign journals&mdash;where you will have
read it&mdash;as well as here, that a <q>sauve qui peut,</q> and
<q>débandade</q> had become the watchword of the Opposition,
<pb n='773'/><anchor id='Pg773'/>
and not thirty would be left on the day for
voting. We see now that this was all pure invention.
Even Förster's departure, which I reported myself, had
not taken place; only Greith had gone. When Darboy
had an audience of the Pope the day before the voting,
and said that there was a considerable number of
Bishops who would join him in saying <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, the
Pope replied, <q>Perhaps many will vote <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign>,
but certainly not above ten <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>.</q> For some
time past Pius has notoriously known everything with
absolute certainty, even the temper of distant countries.
The formulas put into the Pope's mouth by the Roman
Chancery, <q>proprio motu</q> and <q>ex certâ scientiâ,</q> have
been transmuted by the habit of twenty-four years into
actual flesh and blood with him.
</p>

<p>
At the beginning of the sitting the news had spread
among the majority that the negative votes would be
much more numerous than had been supposed on the
evening before. On this Dechamps of Mechlin went
to the heads of the Opposition and entreated them with
humble gestures and whining voice to vote <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign>,
saying there was really some disposition with the
authorities to insert the <q>consensus</q> and <q>testimonium
Ecclesiarum</q> into the fourth chapter. The trick was
<pb n='774'/><anchor id='Pg774'/>
too barefaced to succeed, and sharp words were spoken
on the other side. One of the Bishops said to the new
primate, <q>C'est une impudence sans exemple,</q> and
Darboy called the attention of the three Cardinals to this
treacherous attempt at the last moment to divide and
perplex the Opposition. Now began the voting <q>sub
secreto,</q> as it was again called, and the sub-secretary
Jacobini read the names of the Fathers from the pulpit.
And then a wholly unexpected phenomenon came to
light: out of 600 Fathers present in Rome&mdash;there
were 764 in January&mdash;only 520 had appeared, and it
was at once known that very many of the absentees
had stayed away from dislike to the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and to
avoid the disagreeable consequences of a negative
vote.
</p>

<p>
The line taken by the Orientals in the voting excites
surprise here. The Propaganda has spared no means of
exercising a strict supervision and control over them, and
yet the upshot is that the most influential of them have
voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>, some <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign>, and others have absented
themselves. In fact all the real Eastern Bishops&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
those who represent dioceses&mdash;have voted against
the dogma. Every one acquainted with the state of things
in Asia foresees that the promulgation of the dogma,
<pb n='775'/><anchor id='Pg775'/>
which will follow in spite of this, will lead to the
definitive separation of the Uniate Churches in the East.
But that makes not the slightest impression on the
Pope and the Jesuits.
</p>

<p>
When the names of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign> voters were
read out, the President said <q>quorum, quantum possible
erit, habebitur ratio.</q> That sounded like open
mockery: it meant, <q>We (the Deputation) have already
settled among ourselves what is impossible, viz., making
the co-operation of the episcopate a condition, but still
there are some possible things. If, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, any Bishops
wish to have <q>inerrantia</q> substituted for <q>infallibilitas,</q>
perhaps they may be gratified.</q> But even concessions
of that sort are doubtful, for one cannot give the lie
to Bishop Gasser of Brixen, who has distinctly declared
that <q>nec verbum addetur nec verbum demetur
amplius.</q>
</p>

<p>
Among the conditional voters are Dreux-Brézé, certainly
only because the decree is not strong enough for
him. The whole Hungarian Episcopate remained firm
in its opposition. The Austrians know now why
Rudigier and Fessler were given them as Bishops. I
send you with this the authentic list of the Fathers who
did not vote with a simple <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>. It shows that it
<pb n='776'/><anchor id='Pg776'/>
was just the Bishops of capital cities, as well as North
American, Irish, English, and beyond expectation many
North Italian prelates, who voted against the dogma.
Only one, strictly speaking, was wholly false to his professions,
the Bishop of Porto Rico.
</p>

<p>
The Pope is still sure that at the last critical moment
a divine miracle will enlighten the benighted minds of
the opponents and suddenly reverse their sentiments.
The Holy Ghost will and must do this. Pius seems to
have clear assurances on that point. He had lately a
remarkable conversation about it with a French Bishop,
whom he had never seen before. As he regards every
opponent of the dogma as his personal enemy, he
received him as such and reproached him with being
Cæsar's friend instead of the Pope's; the Bishop replied
that his white hairs testified to his having nothing to
fear or hope for, but simply to follow his conscience,
which constrained him with many of his colleagues to
vote against the new dogma. <q>No,</q> exclaimed Pius,
<q>you will not vote against it; the Holy Ghost at the
decisive hour will irresistibly enlighten you, and you
will all say <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign>.</q>
</p>

<p>
When the French Government in 1733 had the
cemetery of La Chaise surrounded with soldiers, to
<pb n='777'/><anchor id='Pg777'/>
stop the miraculous cures at the grave of the Abbé
Paris, the inscription was found one morning over the
entrance&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>De par le roi défense à Dieu,</l>
<l>De faire miracle en ce lieu.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On the 17th or 24th July 1870 there might be
written over the entrance of the Council Hall&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>De par le Pape ordre au bon Dieu</l>
<l>De faire miracle en ce lieu.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The echo of the Vatican, Veuillot's <hi rend='italic'>Univers</hi>, has just
been accusing the Bishops of the minority of ruining
the papal treasury by prolonging the debates on infallibility
through their opposition, and thus obliging the
Pope to go on supporting his 300 episcopal foster sons,
and buy his infallibility late and at a high price, when
it ought to have been cast into his lap by spontaneous
acclamation at the first. A physician has now been
discovered for the treasury which has sickened under
the infallibility affair. Rothschild is said to have
been here and concluded a loan of forty million franks.
As the deficit only amounts to thirty million, there
remain ten million for fireworks, illuminations and
church-decorations, the journey-money of trusty Bishops,
and the like. But now the war is impending, and with
<pb n='778'/><anchor id='Pg778'/>
it the withdrawal of Peter's pence and perhaps still
worse.<note place='foot'>Meanwhile the <hi rend='italic'>Unita</hi> of July 15 has already begun to indicate the
wholesome political fruits which may be looked for from the dogma of
infallibility. Gallicanism, which demanded fixed guarantees against papal
decisions, has paved the way, according to Margotti, for constitutionalism
and parliamentarism; for after a Pope whose decrees <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign> are not
irreformable, comes a king limited by the Constitution, and then the era
of parliamentary revolutions and political storms is introduced. But now
the bright example set by the Bishops in their submission to the infallible
Pope will restore not France only, but the whole of Europe. From them
the nations will learn to submit as children to their sovereigns, the kingdom
of unrighteousness will pass away, and the kingdom of God succeed.
That is plain speaking; absolutism in the Church will lead to absolutism
in the State. Margotti then surrenders himself to the most brilliant hopes,
predicts unprecedented miracles, and records those which have been already
wrought for infallibility during the Council, or will immediately be
wrought. We cannot venture to withhold them from our readers. First,
it seemed impossible to attain an agreement of the Bishops on the proclamation
of infallibility; all wanted to speak, and the discussion seemed likely
to be endless. But the Holy Ghost unexpectedly interposed; above sixty
Bishops waved their right to speak, and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> was voted and approved.
Secondly, a great opposition of all the governments was feared, who
only kept quiet while they watched the quarrels of the Bishops themselves
in the Council. But scarcely had the Bishops shown themselves unanimous,
when the Hohenzollern question turned up, which absorbs everybody's
attention, and leaves the Church in peace. The third miracle is
still in the future&mdash;the dogma will suddenly dissipate the menaces of war,
because the word of God, like the Son of God, only comes into the world
in the midst of universal peace.</note>
</p>

<p>
The following voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non-placet</foreign>:&mdash;1. <hi rend='italic'>Prague</hi>, Cardinal
Prince-Archbishop Schwarzenberg; 2. <hi rend='italic'>Besançon</hi>,
Cardinal Archbishop Mathieu; 3. <hi rend='italic'>Vienna</hi>, Cardinal
Prince-Archbishop Rauscher; 4. <hi rend='italic'>Antioch</hi>, Patriarch
Jussuf, of the Melchite Rite; 5. <hi rend='italic'>Babylon</hi>, Patriarch
Audu, of the Chaldean Rite; 6. <hi rend='italic'>Gran</hi>, Archbishop
<pb n='779'/><anchor id='Pg779'/>
and Primate of Hungary, Simor; 7. <hi rend='italic'>Lyons</hi>, Archbishop
Ginoulhiac; 8. <hi rend='italic'>Tuam</hi>, Archbishop MacHale; 9. <hi rend='italic'>Olmütz</hi>,
Prince-Archbishop Fürstenberg; 10. <hi rend='italic'>Trabezund</hi>, Bishop
Ghiureghian, of the Armenian Rite; 11. <hi rend='italic'>Munich</hi>, Archbishop
Scherr; 12. <hi rend='italic'>Bamberg</hi>, Archbishop Deinlein; 13.
<hi rend='italic'>Seert</hi>, Bishop Bar-Tatar, of the Chaldean Rite; 14.
<hi rend='italic'>Halifax</hi>, Archbishop Conolly, of the Capuchin Order;
15. <hi rend='italic'>Lemberg</hi>, Archbishop Wierzcheyski, of the Latin
Rite; 16. <hi rend='italic'>Paris</hi>, Archbishop Darboy; 17. <hi rend='italic'>Kalocsa</hi>,
Archbishop Haynald; 18. <hi rend='italic'>Milan</hi>, Archbishop Nazari di
Calabiana; 19. <hi rend='italic'>Tyre</hi>, Archbishop Kauam, of the Melchite
Rite; 20. <hi rend='italic'>Biella</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Italy</hi>), Bishop Losanna; 21.
<hi rend='italic'>Autun</hi>, Bishop Marguerye; 22. <hi rend='italic'>Ivrea</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Piedmont</hi>),
Bishop Moreno; 23. <hi rend='italic'>Dijon</hi>, Bishop Rivet; 24. <hi rend='italic'>Metz</hi>,
Bishop Dupont des Loges; 25. <hi rend='italic'>Iglesias</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sardinia</hi>),
Bishop Montixi; 26. <hi rend='italic'>Acquapendente</hi> (formerly in the
Roman States), Bishop Pellei; 27. <hi rend='italic'>Trieste</hi>, Bishop
Legat; 28. <hi rend='italic'>Orleans</hi>, Bishop Dupanloup; 29. <hi rend='italic'>Vezprim</hi>,
Bishop Ranolder; 30. <hi rend='italic'>Mayence</hi>, Bishop Ketteler; 31.
<hi rend='italic'>Bosnia</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Syrmia</hi>, Bishop Strossmayer; 32. <hi rend='italic'>Budweis</hi>,
Bishop Jirsik; 33. <hi rend='italic'>Breslau</hi>, Prince-Bishop Förster; 34.
<hi rend='italic'>Kerry</hi>, Bishop Moriarty; 35. <hi rend='italic'>Leontopolis, in partibus</hi>,
Bishop Forwerk, Apostolic Vicar of Saxony; 36. <hi rend='italic'>Plymouth</hi>,
Bishop Vaughan; 37. <hi rend='italic'>Clifton</hi>, Bishop Clifford;
<pb n='780'/><anchor id='Pg780'/>
38. <hi rend='italic'>Nice</hi>, Bishop Sola; 39. <hi rend='italic'>Parenzo</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Pola</hi>, Bishop
Dobrilla; 40. <hi rend='italic'>Kreutz</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>in Croatia</hi>), Bishop Smiciklas, of
the Ruthenian Rite; 41. <hi rend='italic'>Augsburgh</hi>, Bishop Dinkel; 42.
<hi rend='italic'>Gurk</hi>, Bishop Wiery; 43. <hi rend='italic'>Caltanisetta</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Sicily</hi>), Bishop
Guttadauro di Reburdone; 44. <hi rend='italic'>Vacz</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>in Hungary</hi>),
Bishop Peitler; 45. <hi rend='italic'>Marianne</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Syria</hi>), &mdash;&mdash; of the Melchite
Rite; 46. <hi rend='italic'>Chatham</hi>, Bishop Rogers; 47. <hi rend='italic'>Csanad</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Temesvar</hi>, Bishop Bonnaz; 48. <hi rend='italic'>Pittsburg</hi>, Bishop
Domenec; 49. <hi rend='italic'>Luzonia</hi>, Bishop Colet; 50. <hi rend='italic'>Sura, in
partibus</hi>, Bishop Maret; 51. <hi rend='italic'>St. Brieuc</hi>, Bishop David;
52. <hi rend='italic'>Trèves</hi>, Bishop Eberhard; 53. <hi rend='italic'>Coutance</hi>, Bishop
Bravard; 54. <hi rend='italic'>Lavant</hi>, Bishop Stepischnigg; 55. <hi rend='italic'>Soissons</hi>,
Bishop Dours; 56. <hi rend='italic'>Akra</hi>, Bishop Mellus, of the Chaldean
Rite; 57. <hi rend='italic'>Siebenbürgen</hi>, Bishop Fogarasz; 58. <hi rend='italic'>Châlons</hi>,
Bishop Meignan; 59. <hi rend='italic'>Valence</hi>, Bishop Gueullette; 60.
<hi rend='italic'>Perpignan</hi>, Bishop Ramadié; 61. <hi rend='italic'>Paleopolis, in partibus</hi>,
Bishop Mariassy (<hi rend='italic'>Hungary</hi>); 62. <hi rend='italic'>Petricola</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Little
Rock</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>United States</hi>), Bishop Fitzgerald; 63. <hi rend='italic'>Marseilles</hi>,
Bishop Place; 64. <hi rend='italic'>Cahors</hi>, Bishop Grimardias; 65.
<hi rend='italic'>Osnaburgh</hi>, Bishop Beckmann; 66. <hi rend='italic'>Szathmar</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Hungary</hi>),
Bishop Virò de Keydi Polany; 67. <hi rend='italic'>Munkacs</hi>, Bishop
Pankovics, of the Ruthenian Rite; 68. <hi rend='italic'>Bayeux</hi>, Bishop
Hugonin; 69. <hi rend='italic'>Raab</hi>, Bishop &mdash;&mdash;; 70. <hi rend='italic'>La Rochelle</hi>,
Bishop Benedetto; 71. <hi rend='italic'>Nancy</hi>, Bishop Foullon; 72.
<pb n='781'/><anchor id='Pg781'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Constantine</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Algiers</hi>), Bishop de las Cases; 73. <hi rend='italic'>Oran</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Algiers</hi>), Bishop Callot; 74. <hi rend='italic'>Gap</hi>, Bishop Guilbert; 75.
<hi rend='italic'>Ermeland</hi>, Bishop Crementz; 76. <hi rend='italic'>Rochester</hi>, Bishop
MacQuaid; 77. <hi rend='italic'>Louisville</hi>, Bishop Kenrick; 78. <hi rend='italic'>Cassovia</hi>,
Bishop Perger (Hungary); 79. <hi rend='italic'>Agathopolis</hi>, Bishop
Namszanowski, Provost of the Prussian Army in Berlin;
80. <hi rend='italic'>Montreal</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Canada</hi>), Bishop Bourget; 81. <hi rend='italic'>Grosswardein</hi>,
Bishop Lipovniczky; 82. <hi rend='italic'>Fünfkirchen</hi>, Bishop
Kovacs; 83. <hi rend='italic'>Steinamanger</hi>, Bishop Szenczy; 84. <hi rend='italic'>Rottenburg</hi>,
Bishop Hefele; 85. <hi rend='italic'>Ajaccio</hi>, Bishop Sante
Casanelli d'Istria, and three more whose names were
omitted in the official catalogue.
</p>

<p>
There voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet juxta modum</foreign>:&mdash;1. De Silvestri,
Cardinal-Priest; 2. Trevisanato, Cardinal Patriarch of
Venice; 3. Guidi, Cardinal Archbishop of Bologna;
4. <hi rend='italic'>Salsburg</hi>, Archbishop and Primate Tarnoczy; 5.
<hi rend='italic'>Oregon City</hi>, Archbishop Blanchet; 6. <hi rend='italic'>Nisibis, in partibus</hi>,
Archbishop Tizzani; 7. <hi rend='italic'>Tyre and Sidon</hi>, Archbishop
Bostani, Maronite; 8. <hi rend='italic'>Manila</hi>, Archbishop Melithon-Martinez;
9. <hi rend='italic'>Granada</hi>, Archbishop Monzon y Martins;
10. <hi rend='italic'>Avignon</hi>, Archbishop Dubrevil; 11. <hi rend='italic'>New York</hi>,
Archbishop MacCloskey; 12. <hi rend='italic'>Cologne</hi>, Archbishop
Melchers; 13. <hi rend='italic'>Melitene, in partibus</hi>, Archbishop Mérode;
14. <hi rend='italic'>Rheims</hi>, Archbishop Landriot; 15. <hi rend='italic'>Sens</hi>, Archbishop
<pb n='782'/><anchor id='Pg782'/>
Bernardou; 16. <hi rend='italic'>Burgos</hi>, Archbishop Yusto; 17.
<hi rend='italic'>Ventimiglia</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Italy</hi>), Bishop Biale; 18. <hi rend='italic'>Columbica</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
partibus</foreign>, Bishop Verolles, Apostolic Vicar in Leao-Tung
(China); 19. <hi rend='italic'>Canopo</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Besi; 20. <hi rend='italic'>Sira</hi>,
Bishop Alberti, Apostolic Delegate in Greece; 21.
<hi rend='italic'>Zenopolis</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Moccagatta, Apostolic
Vicar in Xan-Tung; 22. <hi rend='italic'>Lipari</hi>, Bishop Ideo; 23. <hi rend='italic'>Birmingham</hi>,
Bishop Ullathorne; 24. <hi rend='italic'>Vancouver</hi>, Bishop
Demers; 25. <hi rend='italic'>Mileto</hi>, Bishop Mincione; 26. <hi rend='italic'>Moulins</hi>,
Bishop Dreux-Brézé; 27. <hi rend='italic'>Gezira</hi>, Bishop Hindi, of the
Chaldean Rite; 28. <hi rend='italic'>Hadrianopolis, in partibus</hi>, Bishop
De la Place, Apostolic Vicar in Tsche-Kiang; 29. <hi rend='italic'>Tarnovia</hi>,
Bishop Pukalski (Galicia); 30. <hi rend='italic'>Chartres</hi>, Bishop
Regnault; 31. <hi rend='italic'>Urgel</hi>, Bishop Caixal y Estrade; 32.
<hi rend='italic'>Monterey</hi>, Bishop Amat; 33. <hi rend='italic'>Tanes</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop
Salzano, Dominican; 34. <hi rend='italic'>Newcastle</hi>, Bishop Chadwick;
35. <hi rend='italic'>Lacedonia</hi>, Bishop Majorsini; 36. <hi rend='italic'>Todi</hi>, Bishop
Rosati; 37. <hi rend='italic'>Avellino</hi>, Bishop Gallo; 38. <hi rend='italic'>Amelia</hi>, Bishop
Pace; 39. <hi rend='italic'>Nola</hi>, Bishop Formisano; 40. <hi rend='italic'>Imola</hi>, Bishop
Moretti; 41. <hi rend='italic'>Zamora</hi>, Bishop Condé y Corral; 42.
<hi rend='italic'>Avila</hi>, Bishop Blanco, Dominican; 43. <hi rend='italic'>Savannah</hi>, Bishop
Verot; 44. <hi rend='italic'>Cuenca</hi>, Bishop Payà y Rico; 45. <hi rend='italic'>Cajazzo</hi>,
Bishop Riccio; 46. <hi rend='italic'>Teramo</hi>, Bishop Milella, Dominican;
47. <hi rend='italic'>Nocera</hi>, Bishop Pettinari; 48. <hi rend='italic'>St. Christophori</hi>, Bishop
<pb n='783'/><anchor id='Pg783'/>
De Urguinaona; 49. <hi rend='italic'>Clariopolis</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bsciai, Apostolic
Vicar in Egypt, of the Coptic Rite; 50. <hi rend='italic'>Erzeroum</hi>,
Bishop Melchisedechian, of the Armenian Rite; 51. <hi rend='italic'>Monte
Fiascone</hi>, Bishop Bovieri; 52. <hi rend='italic'>Savona</hi>, Bishop Cerruti; 53.
<hi rend='italic'>Agathonica</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Pagnucci; 54. <hi rend='italic'>Ascalon</hi>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Meurin, Society of Jesus; 55. <hi rend='italic'>Dionysia</hi>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Gentili; 56. <hi rend='italic'>Cattaro</hi>, Bishop
Marchich; 57. <hi rend='italic'>Serena</hi>, Bishop Orrego; 58. Mardin,
Bishop of the Chaldean Rite; 59. <hi rend='italic'>Tiberias</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>,
Bishop Valeschi; 60. Guardi, General of the Ministers of
the Sick; 61. The Abbot of the Camaldolese in Etruria.
</p>

<p>
The following abstained from voting, though in Rome
at the time:&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cardinals</hi>: 1. Mattei, 2. Orfei, 3. Quaglia,
4. Hohenlohe, 5. Berardi, 6. Antonelli, 7. Grassellini;
8. The Patriarch Harcus of Antioch, of the Syrian Rite;
9. The Archbishop and Primate Salomone of Salerno;
10. The Maronite Archbishop Aun of Beirout; 11, 12.
Two other Archbishops; 13. <hi rend='italic'>Aleppo</hi>, Archbishop Matar, of
the Maronite Rite; 14. <hi rend='italic'>Venezuela</hi>, Archbishop Guevara;
15. <hi rend='italic'>Utrecht</hi>, Archbishop Zwysen; 16. <hi rend='italic'>Tours</hi>, Archbishop
Guibert; 17. <hi rend='italic'>Rodi</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Archbishop
Pace-Forno, Bishop of Malta; 18. <hi rend='italic'>Mardin</hi>, Archbishop
Nasarian, of the Armenian Rite; 19. <hi rend='italic'>Alby</hi>, Archbishop
Lyonnet; 20. Iconium, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Archbishop Puecher
<pb n='784'/><anchor id='Pg784'/>
Passavalli; 21. <hi rend='italic'>Guadalaxara</hi>, Archbishop Loya;
22. <hi rend='italic'>Amida</hi>, Archbishop Bahtiarian, of the Armenian
Rite; 23. <hi rend='italic'>Tournay</hi>, Bishop Labis; 24. <hi rend='italic'>Terni</hi>, Bishop
Severa; 25. <hi rend='italic'>Veglia</hi>, Bishop Vitezich; 26. <hi rend='italic'>Almira</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
partibus</foreign>, Bishop Carli, Capuchin; 27. <hi rend='italic'>Montauban</hi>,
Bishop Doney; 28. <hi rend='italic'>Cava</hi>, Bishop Fertilla; 29. <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Grioglio; 30. <hi rend='italic'>Segni</hi> (Papal State),
Bishop Ricci; 31. <hi rend='italic'>Paphos</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Alcazar,
Dominican Vicar Apostolic; 32. <hi rend='italic'>Vicenza</hi>, Bishop Varina;
33. <hi rend='italic'>Salford</hi>, Bishop Turner; 34. <hi rend='italic'>Catanzaro</hi>, Bishop de
Franco; 35. <hi rend='italic'>Bergamo</hi>, Bishop Speranza; 36. <hi rend='italic'>Savannah</hi>,
&mdash;; 37. <hi rend='italic'>St. Angelo in Lombardy</hi>, Bishop Fanelli; 38.
<hi rend='italic'>Dromore</hi>, Bishop Leahy, Dominican; 39. <hi rend='italic'>Glarus</hi>, &mdash;;
40. <hi rend='italic'>Birta</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Pinsoneault; 41. <hi rend='italic'>Fernes</hi>,
Bishop Furlong; 42. <hi rend='italic'>Anagni</hi>, Bishop Pagliari; 43.
<hi rend='italic'>Siguenza</hi>, Bishop Benavides; 44. <hi rend='italic'>Ceramo</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>,
Bishop Jeancard, Suffragan of Marseilles; 45. <hi rend='italic'>Polemonia</hi>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Pinchon; 46. <hi rend='italic'>Lipari</hi>,
Bishop Athanasio; 47. <hi rend='italic'>Apamea</hi>, Archbishop Ata, of the
Melchite Rite; 48. <hi rend='italic'>Mindus</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Papardo
del Parco; 49. <hi rend='italic'>Bursa</hi>, Bishop Tilkian, of the Armenian
Rite; 50. <hi rend='italic'>Astorga</hi>, Bishop Arguelles y Miranda; 51. <hi rend='italic'>Comacchio</hi>,
Bishop Spoglia; 52. <hi rend='italic'>Charlottetown</hi>, Bishop MacIntyre;
53. <hi rend='italic'>Vallis Pratensis</hi>, &mdash; (?); 54. <hi rend='italic'>Lamego</hi>,
<pb n='785'/><anchor id='Pg785'/>
Bishop de Vasconcellos Periera de Mello; 55. <hi rend='italic'>Montpellier</hi>,
Bishop Curtier; 56. <hi rend='italic'>Barcelona</hi>, Bishop Monserrat
y Navarro; 57. <hi rend='italic'>Amatunto</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop
Galezki, Apostolic Vicar in Cracow; 58. <hi rend='italic'>Kilmore</hi>,
Bishop Conaty; 59. <hi rend='italic'>Priene</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Cosi;
60. <hi rend='italic'>Tuy</hi>, Bishop Garcia y Anton; 61. <hi rend='italic'>Puno</hi>, Bishop
Huerta; 62. <hi rend='italic'>Adelaide</hi>, Bishop Shiel; 63. <hi rend='italic'>Albany</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>America</hi>), Bishop Conroy; 64. <hi rend='italic'>Concordia</hi>, Bishop
Frangipani; 65. <hi rend='italic'>St. Hyacinth</hi>, Bishop Laroque; 66.
<hi rend='italic'>Dubuque</hi>, Bishop Hennessy; 67. <hi rend='italic'>Vannes</hi>, Bishop Becel;
68. <hi rend='italic'>Goulburn</hi>, Bishop Lannigan; 69. <hi rend='italic'>St. Germani bei
Monte Cassino</hi>, &mdash; (?); 70. <hi rend='italic'>Verdun</hi>, Bishop Hacquard;
71. <hi rend='italic'>Egéa</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Reynaud; 72. <hi rend='italic'>St. Giov.
di Cuyo</hi>, Bishop Achaval; 73. <hi rend='italic'>Cirene</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>,
Bishop Canzi; 74. <hi rend='italic'>Rodiopolis</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, Bishop Tosi;
75. <hi rend='italic'>Buffalo</hi>, Bishop Ryan; 76. <hi rend='italic'>Adramyttium</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>,
Bishop Gibbons; 77. <hi rend='italic'>Coria</hi>, Bishop Nuñez; 78.
<hi rend='italic'>Heliopolis</hi>, Bishop Nasser, of the Melchite Rite; 79. <hi rend='italic'>Titopolis</hi>,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in partibus</foreign>, &mdash; (?); 80, 81. Abbates nullius; 82, 83.
Burchall, President of the Benedictine Congregation in
England; 84. The Abbot of Janow, Apostolic Administrator
in Russia; 85. Montis Coronæ; 86-91. These
names could not be announced on account of the great
confusion.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='786'/><anchor id='Pg786'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixty-Seventh Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, July 16, 1870.</hi>&mdash;As I had to report in my last
letter, the attempt of the Legates and the Deputation
to outwit and catch the minority by a violation of their
own order of business had all but succeeded. Darboy
and Strossmayer frustrated this plot, on which it is
literally true that the fate of the Church was staked.
For the third canon of the third chapter had been
brought forward in so enlarged and altered a form, that
it involved in substance the abolition of the entire
episcopate, as an integral constituent of the Christian
Church, and substituted for it the papal <q>totality,</q> as
the theologians of the seventeenth century called it;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the theory that in the whole Church there is one
sole individual who is in exclusive possession of all
plenary powers and all ecclesiastical rights. The weight
and importance of the doctrine thereby designed to be
<pb n='787'/><anchor id='Pg787'/>
for the first time imposed on the Church cannot even
be made intelligible in a few words. Most readers are
naturally unaware of the sense attached in canon law
and the language of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi> to the words, <q>potestas
immediata et ordinaria.</q> Well! they mean that all
Christians, whether laymen or clerics, are personally
subjects, body and soul, of their lord and master, the
Pope, who can impose on them without restriction
whatever commands seem good to him. There are,
besides the Pope, who exercises immediate authority
by virtue of his universal episcopate, papal commissaries
in the separate dioceses, who call themselves
Bishops, and are so named by the Roman Chancery.
They exercise the powers delegated to them by the one
true and universal Bishop, and carry out the particular
orders they receive from Rome. According to this
view the whole Church has, properly speaking, no other
right or law or order but the pleasure of the reigning
Pope. This is the most perfect form of absolutism
ever yet excogitated in any man's brains.
</p>

<p>
The order of business prohibits any alteration in the
text of the decrees being voted upon without previous
discussion in Council. That however was now attempted,
and the violation of the order of business by
<pb n='788'/><anchor id='Pg788'/>
the Legates themselves was so flagrant, the design of
fraud so palpable, that the incident continued to be the
subject of general conversation up to the 12th July.
When the plot had miscarried, it was alleged in excuse
that the previous discussion had been forgotten!&mdash;forgotten
precisely in the case of the most important
article yet brought forward, and of a change of such
immeasurable weight that one may truly say no discussion
of equal weight and influence has been passed
in any Council during 1800 years. The affair of course
made a great sensation. The words <q>deceit</q> and
<q>lying</q> were used more than once in the national
meetings of the Opposition Bishops, and it was urged
that the whole Deputation <hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi> were accomplices of
the Legates in this unworthy trick, and that the
Bishops were being compelled in a truly revolting
manner to vote on alterations of the most comprehensive
kind, which had only been communicated to them
the day before. A short memorandum was issued by
the French Bishops, which recommended that this
opportunity should be seized for leaving Rome. It
runs as follows:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>(1). L'heure de la Providence a sonné: le moment
décisif de sauver l'Église est arrivé. (2.) Par les additiones
<pb n='789'/><anchor id='Pg789'/>
faites au <hi rend='smallcaps'>iii.</hi> canon du 3me chap. la Commission
<hi rend='italic'>de Fide</hi> a violé le règlement qui ne permet l'introduction
d'aucun amendement sans discussion conciliaire. (3.)
L'addition subreptice est d'une importance incalculable;
c'est le changement de la constitution de l'Église, la
monarchie pure, absolue, indivisible du Pape, l'abolition
de la judicature et de la co-souveraineté des évêques,
l'affirmation et la définition anticipée de l'infaillibilité
separée et personnelle. (4.) Le devoir et l'honneur ne
permettent pas de voter sans discussion ce canon, qui
contient une immense révolution. La discussion pourrait
et devrait durer six mois, parce qu'il s'agit de la
question capitale, la constitution même de la souveraineté
dans l'Église. (5.) Cette discussion est impossible
à cause des fatigues extrêmes de la saison et des
dispositions de la majorité. (6.) Une seule chose,
digne et honorable, reste à faire: Demander immédiatement
la prorogation du Concile au mois d'Octobre, et
présenter une declaration, ou seraient énumérées toutes
les protestations déjà faites, et où la dernière violation
du règlement, le mépris de la dignité et de la liberté
des évêques seraient mis en lumière. Annoncer en
même temps un départ, qui ne peut plus être différé.
(7.) Par le départ ainsi motivé d'un nombre considérable
<pb n='790'/><anchor id='Pg790'/>
d'évêques de toutes les nations, l'œcuménicité du
Concile cesserait et tous les actes, qu'il pourrait faire
ensuite, seraient d'une autorité nulle. (8.) Le courage
et le dévouement de la minorité auraient, dans le
monde, un retentissement immense. Le Concile se
réunirait au mois d'Octobre dans des conditions infiniment
meilleures. Toutes les questions, à peine ébauchées,
pourraient être reprises, traitées avec dignité et
liberté. L'Église et l'ordre moral du monde seraient
sauvés.</q>
</p>

<p>
But the majority of the Opposition did not assent to
this; they resolved to present another Protest, which
the Court party might apply, like its predecessors, <q>ad
piper et quidquid chartis amicitur ineptis.</q> It was
drawn up by Bishop Dinkel of Augsburgh, and signed,
so far as I know, by all of them.
</p>

<p>
On the evening of the 9th July a proposal of a new
formula of infallibility was distributed to the Bishops;
it was apparently designed to split up the Opposition,
and was broad, declamatory, full of quotations, and
lavish of assurances that the Roman See has always
administered its supreme teaching office in the most excellent
manner and proclaimed nothing but truth. Now,
it was added, since there has been a great deal of contradition,
<pb n='791'/><anchor id='Pg791'/>
it is necessary to define that its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex cathedrâ</foreign>
decisions are infallible, and its decrees on faith and
morals irreformable by virtue of the divine promise
given to it. This new production was discussed in the
French and German conferences and rejected, although
one of the most influential German Bishops, Ketteler,
had taken it under his protection. He assured them
that the Deputation had unanimously resolved that no
change or concession by a hair's-breadth should be
allowed in this form of words, for to deny papal infallibility
involved a denial of the primacy altogether.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile the Jesuit Franzelin had received orders
from the highest authority to revise afresh the formula
adopted by the Deputation, with which Schrader is said
to be very ill satisfied.
</p>

<p>
In the sitting of July 11, first the Bishop of Trevisa,
as a member of the Deputation, defended the notorious
decree in the third canon of the third chapter, which is to
revolutionize the whole constitution of the Church in the
sense of papal absolutism. Then the votes were taken,
by rising and sitting down, on the weightiest and most
pregnant article that has been laid before any Council
for 600 years, and the uncertainty in this method of
voting, wholly unprecedented in Church history, was
<pb n='792'/><anchor id='Pg792'/>
so great that according to the majority only 50 or 60
voted against it, while the minority reckon between 90
and 100 adverse votes.
</p>

<p>
Then Bishop Gasser of Brixen made a speech three
hours long in the name of the Deputation on the infallibility
decree, which in its new form&mdash;and this he
declared to be the <foreign rend='italic'>ultimatum</foreign>&mdash;had been enriched with
an anathema against those who <q>contradicere præsumpserint.</q>
Gasser was unwilling to be left behind by
Manning, Dechamps, Dreux-Brézé and the Spaniards.
He vindicated the doctrines of Cardinal Cajetan against
Ketteler.
</p>

<p>
Meanwhile Cardinal Guidi had been so powerfully
belaboured, that it had frightened him, and he now
voted for the third chapter with the majority. The
process which had been found so effective in France, of
raising their diocesan clergy against fallibilist Bishops,
had been applied to him too by means of agents sent to
Bologna. The apostasy of Archbishop Tarnoczy of
Salzburg, who also voted with the majority, excited
grief but no surprise. While the occupant of one of the
oldest Sees of Germany, the successor of Arno, Pilgrim
and Colloredo, flung away his own rights and those of
his successors like so many hollow nutshells, even
<pb n='793'/><anchor id='Pg793'/>
Cardinal Silvestri voted against the third chapter and
the anathema attached to the fourth.
</p>

<p>
The result of the 13th July has acted like an earthquake,
shaking and confusing for the moment men's
heads and plans of operation. Even if half the voters
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign> are abstracted, as belonging to the majority,
there remain 31 votes among them in favour of
essential changes in the fourth chapter, changes which
the Deputation has declared to be absolutely inadmissible,
and which, if admitted, would offend one section of
the majority. This last consequence would not of course
matter at all; a single word from the Pope would set
it aside at once, for it is self-evident that no Bishop
who is convinced of his unconditional inerrancy could
hesitate for a moment to vote for a decree sanctioned
by him. Still the perplexity is great. If the decree,
as voted by the majority, is brought forward at the
public session, some 120 negative votes may be expected.
But the Pope is resolved to become infallible <q>senza
conditione,</q> as he says.
</p>

<p>
It is now often said that on the day of the Solemn
Session the Holy Ghost will yet most assuredly work a
wonderful miracle and convert the Opposition so suddenly
that, although they had entered the Council Hall
<pb n='794'/><anchor id='Pg794'/>
resolved to say <q>No,</q> they will say <q>Yes.</q> Some, including
Antonelli, vote for conciliatory measures and concessions,
which however the Deputation on Faith declares
to be impossible. The other very numerous party says
on the contrary that the unexpected force and extent
of the opposition to so fundamental a dogma makes
an anathema all the more necessary. A new plan of
operations has now been hit upon, which is greatly
favoured by the recent deaths. The grand Session for
proclaiming the dogma had been fixed for the 17th,
and many among the minority were with great difficulty
persuaded to remain till that critical day. But
now the 25th is talked of.<note place='foot'>The impending war led to its being held earlier.</note> At the same time the
report is circulated and confirmed by Antonelli, that
there will be no prorogation even at the end of July or
beginning of August, but the Council will continue,
though many Bishops, on requesting leave, will be
permitted to depart. It is urgently necessary, according
to Antonelli, to settle the questions about the
Oriental Rite. Yet for centuries the Court of Rome
has not troubled any Council with these affairs, but
settled and regulated them by itself, as is testified by
a whole series of papal decrees. And after infallibility
<pb n='795'/><anchor id='Pg795'/>
is proclaimed, it is utterly superfluous to keep
hundreds of foreign Bishops here on that account.
But it is known that the new dogma will lead to the
separation of the Orientals, and so their Bishops are
to be kept here longer as hostages, and the name of
the Council is to supply the pretext. And it is hoped
that the French and German Bishops will the more
certainly ask leave and go home, so that the Opposition
may be reduced to a small handful. The Pope
himself appears greatly to desire this, as was at once
inferred from his remark that the Archbishop of Paris
is staying on a long time.
</p>

<p>
Five Bishops, including Förster of Breslau, actually
took their departure on the 14th.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='796'/><anchor id='Pg796'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixty-Eighth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, July 17, 1870.</hi>&mdash;All the Bishops of the
minority have left Rome, after presenting a statement
of their attitude towards the decrees on the Papacy.
They made a last attempt, immediately before going,
to move the Pope at least not to hurry on the affair but
to grant some respite by proroguing the Council. At
twelve o'clock to-day he received a deputation headed
by Darboy and Simor. Darboy, who spoke first, represented
to him the great and manifold dangers the
definition would unquestionably give rise to for the
whole Church. Hitherto Pius had met all suggestions
of scruple by appealing to his <q>I am Tradition</q>&mdash;his
already assured infallibility. This time he did not do
so. He fell back on the ground of its being <q>too late.</q>
Matters had gone too far, and the whole Christian
world was now too much occupied and too powerfully
excited about the question. Besides, the Council had
<pb n='797'/><anchor id='Pg797'/>
already passed a decree by a considerable majority,
and he was therefore in no position to put a check on
the Council, which was now in full swing and urgently
pressing for a final decision on this question. The
promulgation of the decree of the majority will accordingly
follow to-morrow.
</p>

<p>
The Orientals have subscribed the declaration of the
minority. Two German Bishops only, Melchers and
Ketteler, have withheld their signature and presented a
separate declaration of their own to the Pope. The
manifesto of the minority runs thus:&mdash;
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'><hi rend='italic'>Beatissime Pater!</hi></q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>In Congregatione generali die 13 h. m. habitâ, dedimus
suffragia nostra super schemate primæ Constitutionis
dogmaticæ de Ecclesiâ Christi.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Notum est Sanctitati Vestræ 88 Patres fuisse, qui,
conscientiâ urgente et amore Sanctæ Ecclesiæ permoti,
suffragium suum per verba <emph>non placet</emph> emiserunt; 62
alios, qui suffragati sunt per verba <emph>placet juxta modum</emph>,
denique 70 circiter qui a congregatione abfuerunt
atque a suffragio emittendo abstinuerunt. His accedunt
et alii, qui, infirmitatibus aut aliis gravioribus
rationibus ducti, ad suas diœceses reversi sunt.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Hâc ratione Sanctitati Vestræ et toto mundo suffragia
<pb n='798'/><anchor id='Pg798'/>
nostra nota atque manifesta fuere, patuitque quam
multis episcopis sententia nostra probatur, atque hoc
modo munus officiumque quod nobis incumbit persolvimus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ab eo inde tempore nihil prorsus evenit quod
sententiam nostram mutaret, quin imo multa eaque
gravissima acciderunt, quæ nos in proposito nostro
confirmaverunt. Atque ideo nostra jam edita suffragia
nos renovare ac confirmare declaramus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Confirmantes itaque per hanc scripturam suffragia
nostra a Sessione publicâ die 18 h. m. habendâ abesse
constituimus. Pietas enim filialis ac reverentia quæ
missos nostros nuperrime ad pedes Sanctitatis Vestræ
adduxere, non sinunt nos in causâ Sanctitatis Vestræ
personam adeo proxime concernente palam et in facie
patris dicere <emph>non placet</emph>.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Et aliunde suffragia in Solenni Sessione edenda
repeterent dumtaxat suffragia in generali Congregatione
deprompta.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Redimus itaque sine morâ ad greges nostros, quibus
post tam longam absentiam ob belli timores et præsertim
summas eorum spirituales indigentias summopere
necessarii sumus; dolentes, quod, ob tristia in
quibus versamur rerum adjuncta etiam conscientiarum
<pb n='799'/><anchor id='Pg799'/>
pacem et tranquillitatem turbatam inter fideles nostros
reperturi simus.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Interea Ecclesiam Dei et Sanctitatem Vestram, cui
intemeratam fidem et obedientiam profitemur, D. N. J. C.
gratiæ et præsidio toto corde commendantes sumus
Sanctitatis Vestræ</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>devotissimi et obedientissimi filii.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q><hi rend='smallcaps'>Romæ</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>17 Jul. 1870</hi>.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='800'/><anchor id='Pg800'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Sixty-Ninth Letter.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rome, July 19, 1870.</hi>&mdash;On the evening of the 15th
a deputation of the Bishops of the minority waited
on the Pope, consisting of Simor, Primate of Hungary,
Archbishops Ginoulhiac, Darboy and Scherr (of
Munich), Ketteler and Rivet, Bishop of Dijon. After
waiting an hour they were admitted at 9 o'clock in the
evening. What they tried to obtain was in fact much
less than the Opposition had hitherto aimed at: they
only asked for the withdrawal of the addition to the
third chapter, which assigns to the Pope the exclusive
possession of all ecclesiastical powers, and the insertion
in the fourth chapter of a clause limiting his infallibility
to those decisions which he pronounces <q>innixus
testimonio Ecclesiarum.</q> Pius gave an answer which
will sound in Germany like a maliciously invented
fable,&mdash;<q>Je ferai mon possible, mes chers fils, mais je
n'ai pas encore lu le Schéma; je ne sais pas ce qu'il
<pb n='801'/><anchor id='Pg801'/>
contient.</q> And he then requested Darboy, who had
acted as spokesman, to give him the petition of the
minority in writing. He promised to do so, and added,
not without irony, that he would take the liberty of
sending with it to his Holiness the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, which the
Deputation on Faith and the Legates had with such
culpable levity omitted to lay before him, when it
wanted only two days to the promulgation of the
dogma, thereby exposing him to the peril of having to
proclaim a decree he was ignorant of. This Darboy
did, and in a second letter to the Deputation severely
censured their negligence in not even having communicated
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> to the chief personage, the Pope.
</p>

<p>
Pius added further, whether ironically or in earnest
I know not, that if only the minority would increase
their 88 votes to 100, he would see what could be
done. He concluded by assuring them it was notorious
that the whole Church had always taught the
unconditional infallibility of the Pope. Bishop Ketteler
then came forward, flung himself on his knees
before the Pope, and entreated for several minutes
that the Father of the Catholic world would make
some concession to restore peace and her lost unity to
the Church and the episcopate. It was a peculiar
<pb n='802'/><anchor id='Pg802'/>
spectacle to witness these two men, of kindred and yet
widely diverse nature, in such an attitude, the one
prostrate on the ground before the other. Pius is
<q>totus teres atque rotundus,</q> firm and immoveable,
smooth and hard as marble, infinitely self-satisfied intellectually,
mindless and ignorant, without any understanding
of the mental conditions and needs of mankind,
without any notion of the character of foreign
nations, but as credulous as a nun, and above all penetrated
through and through with reverence for his own
person as the organ of the Holy Ghost, and therefore
an absolutist from head to heel, and filled with the
thought, <q>I and none beside me.</q> He knows and
believes that the holy Virgin, with whom he is on the
most intimate terms, will indemnify him for the loss of
land and subjects by means of the infallibility doctrine
and the restoration of the papal dominion over states
and peoples as well as over Churches. He also believes
firmly in the miraculous emanations from the sepulchre
of St. Peter. At the feet of this man the German
Bishop flung himself, <q>ipso Papâ papalior,</q> a zealot
for the ideal greatness and unapproachable dignity of
the Papacy, and at the same time inspired by the
aristocratic feeling of a Westphalian nobleman and
<pb n='803'/><anchor id='Pg803'/>
the hierarchical self-consciousness of a Bishop and
successor of the ancient chancellor of the Empire, while
yet he is surrounded by the intellectual atmosphere of
Germany, and with all his firmness of belief is sickly
with the pallor of thought, and inwardly struggling with
the terrible misgiving that after all historical facts are
right, and that the ship of the <hi rend='italic'>Curia</hi>, though for the
moment it proudly rides the waves with its sails swelled
by a favourable wind, will be wrecked on that rock at
last.
</p>

<p>
The prostration of the Bishop of Mayence seemed to
make some impression on Pius. He dismissed the
deputation in a hopeful temper. It was of short duration.
For directly the report got about that the Pope
was yielding, Manning and Senestrey (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>de grands effets
par de petites causes</foreign>) went to the Pope and assured him
that all was now ripe, and the great majority enthusiastically
set on the most absolute and uncompromising
form of the infallibilist theory, and at the same time
frightened him by the warning that, if he made any
concession, he would be disgraced in history as a second
Honorius. That was enough to stifle any thought of
moderation that might have been awakened in his
soul.
</p>

<pb n='804'/><anchor id='Pg804'/>

<p>
The sitting of July 16 was held to consider the proposals
of those who had voted <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juxta modum</foreign>. The
Legates had promised to pay as much consideration as
was possible to their wishes, and they redeemed their
pledge by striking out one passage and inserting another.
The majority decided, on the motion of certain
Spaniards, which was adopted by the Deputation on Faith,
to strike out the words at the opening of the fourth
chapter, saying the Pope will define nothing <q>nisi quod
antiquitus tenet cum cæteris Ecclesiis Apostolica Sedes.</q>
This was felt to impose too narrow limits on the Pope's
infallibility and arbitrary power of defining. And as
the minority had the day before expressed to the Pope
their special desire that the consent of the Church
should be laid down as a requisite condition of doctrinal
definitions, it was now resolved, in direct contradiction
to their wishes, again on the motion of Spanish Bishops,
not only to leave the words <q>definitiones Pontificis ex
sese seu per sese esse irreformabiles,</q> but to add to
them <q>non autem ex consensu Ecclesiæ.</q> And thus
the infallibilist decree, as it is now to be received under
anathema by the Catholic world, is an eminently Spanish
production, as is fitting for a doctrine which was
born and reared under the shadow of the Inquisition.
</p>

<pb n='805'/><anchor id='Pg805'/>

<p>
In the last sitting of the Congregation three Bishops
of the Deputation on Faith spoke, the Neapolitan
D'Avanzo, Bishop of Calvi and Teano, Zinelli, Bishop
of Rovigo, the author of the notorious addition to the
third chapter of the third canon, and Gasser, Bishop of
Brixen. D'Avanzo was jocose: <q>As,</q> said he, <q>the
angel bade the Apostle John swallow a book, telling
him it would make his belly bitter but taste sweet as
honey in his mouth, so must we Bishops swallow this
infallibilist <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and I have done so already. It will
no doubt give many of us a stomach-ache, but we must
act as if we had honey in our mouths.</q> Gasser, who as
a speaker is <q>se ipse amans sine rivali,</q> to quote Cicero's
saying about Pompey, made a speech of endless length,
exhausting the patience of his hearers; but there was
some gold mixed with all this dross. Such was his
declaration that Councils had hitherto been useful only
for people of unsound faith, who did not chose to
believe the Pope's <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ipse dixit</foreign>, which every good Christian
had always believed. But now <q>quid credendum sit
unice ab arbitrio Pontificis in posterum dependebit.</q>
On this a well-known Hungarian Bishop could not
refrain from observing to his neighbour, <q>Si etiam infallibilitas
Pontificis contenta esset in Sacrâ Scripturâ
<pb n='806'/><anchor id='Pg806'/>
magis compromitti non posset quam hoc levissimo ac
ineptissimo sermone, quo auditores ex integro jam
lassos ad vomitum movit et martyres reddidit.</q>
</p>

<p>
An amusing scene occurred at the close of this sitting,
the last attended by the Bishops of the minority. A
printed address was read out and distributed to the
Fathers, in which the Legates complained in the strongest
language of certain works describing the course of the
Council. Two were named and characterized as <q>calumnious,</q>
both published at Paris. The one, by Gaillard,
was <hi rend='italic'>Ce qui se passe au Concile</hi>; the other was by a man
distinguished alike for intellect, eloquence and learning,
a member of the Council, who has had almost unique
opportunities of seeing through the whole business. It
is the work I have before mentioned, <hi rend='italic'>La Dernière Heure
du Concile</hi>, in which the personal intervention of the
Pope and the pressure brought to bear by him are
forcibly depicted in strict accordance with truth. This
pamphlet had already created a great sensation, and
when the Legates called on the Bishops to join them in
condemning it, the Italians and Spaniards, who&mdash;being
for the most part ignorant of French&mdash;had not read it,
immediately shouted out <q>Nos condemnamus.</q> <q>We do
not,</q> cried the Bishops of the minority. Two copies of
<pb n='807'/><anchor id='Pg807'/>
the address were then handed to each of them, one of
which they were ordered to return with their names
subscribed. The result was not successful; Haynald
told the Legates, in the name of the Hungarian Bishops,
that they had better first translate <foreign rend='italic'>La Dernière Heure</foreign>
into Latin, and then he and his colleagues would see
whether it was really as bad as the Cardinals maintained.
</p>

<p>
All the Bishops from South and Central Italy who
could be whipped up, or who had previously obtained
leave of absence on account of illness or age, were peremptorily
recalled for the Solemn Session of July 18.
Of the Cardinals, Hohenlohe was absent. The rest appeared,
including Antonelli, but only three, Patrizzi,
Bonaparte and Pambianco, threw a certain spontaneity
and energy of voice and manner into their <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> by
standing up to deliver it. Guidi was the one most
observed; he sat there with an oppressed and abstracted
air, and his scarcely audible <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> escaped with difficulty
from his lips. The two negative voters were
Bishops Riccio of Cajazzo and Fitzgerald of Little Rock.
When the Monsignore who was repeating the names
and votes had credited one of them with a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Placet</foreign> out
of his own head, the Bishop shouted in a stentorian
voice, <q>No; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non placet</foreign>!</q>
</p>

<pb n='808'/><anchor id='Pg808'/>

<p>
As all the Bishops of the Opposition but two stayed
away, and an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>abest</foreign> was the answer to every name of
the slightest note that was called, the Holy Ghost had
no opportunity for working a miracle of conversion,
and all went prosaically and smoothly as the wheels of a
watch, without any sensation. Each of the stipendiaries
has discharged his obligation, and the Pope and Monsignori
find that the Council has cost large sums, but
think the money is well spent and will bring in abundant
interest. The most remarkable case of desertion
was that of Bishop Landriot of Rheims. Not one of the
Bishops had been so open-mouthed, or had announced
his fallibilist opinions with such copious flow of words
to everybody he came across. He now says, like
Talleyrand, that he has only deserted before the rest.
Clerical Rome, so far as I can yet make out, is not in
any very exalted state of enthusiasm; that is prevented
by the political conjunctures, which give Antonelli and
Berardi a good deal to think about. De Banneville
has indeed given the most consoling assurances to Antonelli;
the 5000 French troops at Civita Vecchia, who
had received orders to hold themselves ready for recall
to France, are to be at once replaced by 5000 more&mdash;recruits
it is believed. Paris wishes just now to be on
<pb n='809'/><anchor id='Pg809'/>
the best terms with Rome, who may well prove a useful
ally in what the <hi rend='italic'>Monde</hi> has already designated a
religious war against Protestantism. Meanwhile they
are pleased at the Vatican to have erected their <foreign rend='italic'>rocher
de bronze</foreign> beforehand. The Bishops have&mdash;ostensibly
of their own free will&mdash;abdicated in favour of the monarch,
to receive back from him so many rights and
commissions as he may think good to delegate to them.
The revolution in the Church is accomplished <q>to enrich
<emph>one</emph> among all.</q> Pius himself is more than content;
his supreme desire, the crown of his life and
work, is attained.
</p>

<p>
During the voting and promulgation a storm burst
over Rome, and made the Council Hall so dark that
the Pope could not read the decree of his infallibility
without having a candle brought. It was read to an
accompaniment of thunder and lightning. Some of
the Bishops said that heaven thereby signified its
condemnation of Gallicanism, while others thought
Pius was receiving a divine attestation, as the new
Moses who proclaimed the Law of God, like the old
one, amid thunder and lightning. It is remarkable
that the days of the opening and closing of this Council
were the two darkest and most depressing Rome has
<pb n='810'/><anchor id='Pg810'/>
witnessed during the eight months of its session. It
rained without intermission, so that the promised illumination
was partly given up and partly proved a
lamentable failure. There were few but monks, nuns
and Zouaves, during the session in the very empty-looking
church. When the Pope at last proclaimed
himself the infallible and absolute ruler of all the
baptized <q>with the approbation of the holy Council,</q>
some bravos shouted, several persons clapped, and the
nuns cried in tones of tender rapture, <q>Papa mio!</q>
That was the only semblance of a demonstration. If
any spark of enthusiasm really glimmered in the souls
of the Romans, it was quenched by the downpour of
rain. The keen-witted Roman, who is accustomed to
speak of this Pope with a certain good-humoured irony,
as a sort of comic personality, thinks there is no harm
in gratifying the wish of the old man who has set his
heart on this infallibility; that will hurt nobody.
All the most important members of the diplomatic
bodies stayed away, in obedience to the instructions of
their governments. Neither the ambassadors of Austria,
France, Prussia or Bavaria were present. The Belgian
and Dutch consuls and an agent of some South American
Republic attended. The decrees of July 18, establishing
<pb n='811'/><anchor id='Pg811'/>
under anathema the two new dogmas, are the
following:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>(<hi rend='italic'>a.</hi>) Si quis itaque dixerit, Romanum Pontificem
habere tantummodo officium inspectionis vel directionis,
non autem plenam et supremam potestatem jurisdictionis
in universam Ecclesiam, non solum in rebus,
quæ ad fidem et mores, sed etiam quæ ad disciplinam
et regimen Ecclesiæ per totum orbem diffusæ pertinent;
aut eum habere tantum potiores partes, non
vero totam plenitudinem hujus supremæ potestatis,
aut hanc ejus potestatem non esse ordinariam et immediatam
sive in omnes ac singulas Ecclesias sive in
omnes et singulos Pastores et fideles&mdash;anathema sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>(<hi rend='italic'>b.</hi>) Sacro approbante Concilio docemus et divinitus
revelatum dogma esse definimus: Romanum Pontificem,
cum ex cathedrâ loquitur, id est, cum omnium Christianorum
Pastoris et Doctoris munere fungens, pro
supremâ suâ apostolicâ auctoritate doctrinam de fide
vel moribus ab universâ Ecclesiâ tenendam definit,
per assistentiam divinam, ipsi in beato Petro promissam,
eâ infallibilitate pollere, quâ divinus Redemptor
Ecclesiam suam in definiendâ doctrinâ de fide vel
moribus instructam esse voluit; ideoque ejusmodo
<emph>Romani Pontificis definitiones esse ex sese, non autem
<pb n='812'/><anchor id='Pg812'/>
ex consensu Ecclesiæ irreformabiles</emph>. Si quis autem huic
Nostræ definitioni contradicere, quod Deus avertat,
præsumpserit&mdash;anathema sit.</q>
</p>

<p>
In the work against infallibility circulated here by
the Bishop of Mayence occurs the following passage:
<q>Will it not seem to all nations that the authority of
all Bishops is suppressed and sentenced to death, only
in order to erect on such vast and manifold ruins the
unlimited authority of the one Roman Pope?</q> When
these lines were written, the Bishop and his theologian
had no notion, or at least no knowledge, of the third
anathema of the third chapter, which was afterwards
made still more rigorous. They were only thinking of
infallibility, but what would they have said, had they
known that the Bishops would be required to subscribe
to the abolition of the episcopate and the transference
of all conceivable ecclesiastical powers and rights over
the 180 million of Catholics in principle and in detail to
the Pope alone, as a new article of faith imposed under
anathema? And yet this is what happened on the
13th and 18th July 1870. That the ordinary and immediate
jurisdiction of the Bishops still survives, is
indeed affirmed in the decree, but the affirmation is
contrary to fact. It would be in inevitable collision
<pb n='813'/><anchor id='Pg813'/>
with the constantly encroaching jurisdiction of the
Pope; the earthen vessel dashed against the iron.
</p>

<p>
The Jewish general and historian, Josephus, relates
how he was shut up with forty companions in the
valley of Jehoshaphat, and summoned to surrender by
the Romans. They resolved to die first. The Bishops
are not offered this alternative, but threatened with
both at once. They are bidden to submit and then
kill themselves, to subscribe the decree of the majority,
and thereby sign the sentence which degrades
and annihilates them, under pain of incurring anathema.
That is the demand. The situation is an
unprecedented one. And what of the 532 real or
titular Bishops who have made the 13th and 18th July
<q>dies nefasti</q> for the Church, and renounced so many
rights and duties for themselves and their successors,
like a cast-off garment? Perhaps it lightens their
hearts and is a pleasant feeling to them to be able to
say, <q>Thank God, I need not trouble myself any more
about doctrine, tradition, or dogma; henceforth the one
infallible oracle in the Vatican will attend to all that, and
he again will devolve the burden on the lusty shoulders
of the Jesuits, as he has done before. And how sweet
and convenient it is to be a mere executor of papal
<pb n='814'/><anchor id='Pg814'/>
decrees, while one's episcopal income remains untouched,
and to be able to cover one's-self with the Medusa
shield of a papal order in every difficulty, and every
conflict with clergy, people or governments!</q> I heard
a Bishop of this party say the other day, <q>Now first
begin the golden days of the episcopate.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is reported that on the very day after the promulgation
several Bishops experienced a certain reaction
of sobriety, a feeling like what German students
are wont to attribute to cats, and inquired of the high
dogma-fabricating parties, the Legates and some members
of the Deputation, whether they were really bound
to believe, confess and teach all that is contained
in the Syllabus, the Bull <hi rend='italic'>Unam Sanctam</hi>, etc., as <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>,
the subjection of the secular powers to the Pope, the
Church's power of inflicting bodily punishment with
Pius who reigns gloriously, the burning of heretics
with Leo <hi rend='smallcaps'>x.</hi>, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>et id genus omne</foreign>. They are said to have
been answered with a well-known Roman proverb,
<q>Toto devorato bove, turpe est in caudâ deficere</q>&mdash;<q>You
have swallowed the whole ox of papal infallibility,
and the last Spanish addition with it, and you
need not strain at the tail, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the consequences; that
indeed is the best part of this ox.</q>
</p>

<pb n='815'/><anchor id='Pg815'/>

<p>
The Bishops of the minority agreed before leaving
Rome that they would none of them act alone and
independently, in such further steps as would have to
be taken concerning the decrees of the majority, but
would all continue to correspond and act in concert.
Meanwhile the Council has not been prorogued, but
leave of absence is given to Bishops who can allege
urgent reasons up to November 15. Perhaps in the
interval the builders of the new Jesuit-Papal Zion,
who stay behind, will prepare many a surprise for the
Catholic world.
</p>

<p>
Future historians will begin a new period of Church
history with July 18, 1870, as with October 31, 1517.
</p>

<p>
Are we really at the end of the drama? It appears
so. On the same spot where, 1856 years ago, the first
monarch of the world, Augustus, bade the attendants on
his death-bed clap their hands in token of the rôle
being well played out to the end, the Roman courtiers
on July 18 have saluted by clapping of hands the first
man proclaimed infallible monarch of the world by 532
spiritual satraps. The eight months' campaign has
terminated in the preliminary closing act of July 18;
the absolute Papacy celebrates its financially dear-bought,
but otherwise easily obtained, triumph over
<pb n='816'/><anchor id='Pg816'/>
the Church, which now lies defenceless at the feet
of the Italians. It only remains to follow up the
anathematized enemy, the Bishops of the minority, into
their lurking-places, and compel each man of them to
bend under the Caudine yoke amid the scornful laughter
of his colleagues of the majority. Anathemas, the
<q>ultima ratio</q> of Rome, have already been discharged
at the fugitives, and every such shot of the Infallible
is itself infallible.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='819'/><anchor id='Pg819'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix I.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Speech of Darboy, Archbishop of Paris, delivered
May 20, on the</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Constitutio Dogmatica de Ecclesiâ</hi>.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
There seem to me to be three points to be considered
in reference to this <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>: its origin, its contents
and scope, and its practical results.
</p>

<p>
And first as regards its origin and presentation to the
Council at this time, it is enough to mention two facts,
from which it may be judged whether the affair has
been conducted regularly and in accordance with the
dignity and rights of this venerable assembly.
</p>

<p>
It is certain that the fourth chapter, dealing with
the infallibility of the Pope, is the turning-point of the
whole <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. For whatever is brought forward in
the former chapters about the power and origin of the
primacy in Peter and its continuance in the Popes,
about which there is no difference among us,&mdash;and
certainly in the first and second chapters this seems to
exceed the right measure&mdash;is unmistakeably connected
with the infallibility in the fourth chapter. So entirely
is this infallibility the grand object of the Vatican
Council, that some have indiscreetly asserted it is
in a sense the sole object. And with reason, for the
<pb n='820'/><anchor id='Pg820'/>
fabrication of such a dogma must always remain the
weightiest act of an Œcumenical Council; and moreover
the other questions to be dealt with are either of
far less importance, or have long since been settled and
only require revision, as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, questions about the being
and attributes of God, the reality and need of revelation,
the duty of faith, and the relation of faith to
reason. Yet this serious question of infallibility was
neither indicated in the Bull convoking the Council nor
in the other public announcements referring to it, and
with good reason, because on the one hand the
Catholic world had no desire for a settlement of this
question, nor was there any other ground producible for
meddling with what had always hitherto been a subject
of free inquiry among theologians, and on the other
hand there are many and grave evils, partly endangering
the salvation of souls, which the Pope out of his care
and affection has thought it more needful to deal with.
</p>

<p>
It is certain that the first stirring of this question
came from without, from religious and secular journalists,
and that too in an impertinent manner, against all
ecclesiastical and traditional precedent and all rules of
hierarchical order and usage, by seeking to put a pressure
on the conscience of the Bishops through demagogic
agitation, and to intimidate them with the
prospect of intrigues in their dioceses which would
make the government of them impossible. Nay, matters
have come to such a pass that the Fathers of the
Council, however piously and courageously they may
be simply following their conscience, are accused of
<pb n='821'/><anchor id='Pg821'/>
having paid an improper deference to party opinion, by
promoting the introduction of the infallibility question
in consequence of these violent agitations, and all of us
appear to have lost something of dignity and freedom
through the tumult raised before the doors of the Council-chamber.
And such a judgment, which is in the
highest degree mischievous and injurious to our honour,
can hardly be endured without damage and disgrace to
this venerable assembly, an assembly which must act
independently and not under pressure from without,
which must not only be, but appear to be, free.
</p>

<p>
It is further certain that the question brought before
us to-day has been introduced against the natural and
logical order of the subjects in hand, and thereby the
cause itself is prejudiced. The rest of the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de
Fide</hi> ought first to have been submitted to our consideration,
on which we have already debated and have the
arguments of both sides so fresh in our memory that the
final discussion would have been all the easier. Then
again the <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Ecclesiâ</hi> begins quite incorrectly
with the primacy. Neither its first compilers nor any
theologians before now were of opinion that the treatise
on the Church should begin with that. And furthermore,
our studies have been directed to the questions
intended to come on for consideration according to the
order originally announced.
</p>

<p>
And lastly, it is certain that the precipitate introduction
of the question of infallibility by reversing the
original order has contributed to the injury rather than
the honour of the Holy See. For as, according to the
<pb n='822'/><anchor id='Pg822'/>
Bull <hi rend='italic'>Multiplices inter</hi>, motions are to be sent in to a
special Congregation, which then reports to the Pope,
who either accepts or rejects its decisions, it follows
that the authors of this motion have compelled the
Holy Father to make a decision in his own case and in
reference to a personal prerogative, and have thereby&mdash;no
doubt unintentionally&mdash;failed to show a fitting regard
for his high position, if they have not rather
directly injured it.
</p>

<p>
If I am right on all these points&mdash;and such appears
to be the case&mdash;it is impossible to discuss and decide
upon the question of infallibility, thus originating and
thus introduced, without paving the way for the insults
of unbelievers and the reproaches which threaten the
moral authority of this Council. And this should the
more carefully be avoided, because writings and reports
directed against the power and legitimacy of the Council
are already current and widely circulated, so that it
seems more likely to sow the seeds of contradiction and
disunion among Christians than to quiet men's minds
and lead to peace. If I may venture to add a practical
remark to this portion of my speech, I should say that
some have with good reason declared this question to be
inopportune, and that there would be equally good reason
for abstaining from any decision, even if the discussion
of it were opportune.
</p>

<p>
On the contents and tendency of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> I shall
make only a few observations.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> does not deal with the infallibility of the
Church, which we all believe, and which has been
<pb n='823'/><anchor id='Pg823'/>
proved for twenty centuries, but lays down as an article
of faith that the Pope is, alone and of himself, infallible,
and that he possesses this privilege of inerrancy in all
matters to which the infallibility of the Church herself
extends. It must be well understood that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>
does not refer to that universally admitted infallibility,
which is the invincible and inviolable strength of dogmatic
decrees and decisions binding alike on all the
faithful and all their pastors, and which reposes wholly
and solely on the agreement of the Bishops in union with
the Pope, but that it refers&mdash;though this is not expressly
stated&mdash;to the personal, absolute and exclusive infallibility
of the Pope. On the former kind of infallibility&mdash;that
of the Church&mdash;complete harmony prevails
among us, and there is therefore no ground for any
discussion, whence it follows that it is the second kind
of infallibility which is in question here. To deny this
would be to disguise and distort the doctrine and spirit
of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>. And moreover, the Pope's personal infallibility
is not maintained there as a mere opinion or
commendable doctrine, but as a dogma of faith. Hitherto
the opportuneness and admissibility of entertaining this
question has been disputed at the Council; that dispute
is now closed by the Pope's decision that the matter can
no longer be passed over in silence, and we have now to
consider whether it is or is not opportune to declare the
personal infallibility of the Pope a dogma.
</p>

<p>
To deal rightly with this subject and come to a decision,
it is requisite that the formula or definition of
the doctrine should be laid before us, that it should be
<pb n='824'/><anchor id='Pg824'/>
proved by sure and unquestionable evidence, and finally,
that it should be accepted with moral unanimity.
</p>

<p>
There is the greatest difficulty in fixing the form or
definition of the doctrine, as is shown by the example of
those who first composed and then revised the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>,
and who seem to have expended much&mdash;perhaps fruitless&mdash;labour
upon it; for they indulge in ambiguous
expressions which open the door to endless controversies.
What is meant by <q>exercising the office of the
supreme teacher of Christendom</q>? What are the external
conditions of its exercise? When is it certain
that the Pope has exercised it? The compilers of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> think of course that this is as clear as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the
œcumenicity of a Council. But they thereby contradict
themselves, for a Council is only then held œcumenical
by the body of the faithful scattered over the world
when the Bishops are morally unanimous, and therefore
infallibility would still depend on the consent of the
episcopate if the same principle is to be applied to papal
decrees. The authors of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> either eliminate
this consent or they do not. In the former case they
are introducing an innovation, and an innovation which
is unprecedented and intolerable; in the latter case
they are only expressing an old and universally received
view and fighting a man of straw. But in no case can they
pass over in silence the necessity or needlessness of the
consent of the episcopate, for that would be to infuse
doubts into the faithful and throw fresh difficulties in
their way in a question of such vast importance and
all that at present hinges on it.
</p>

<pb n='825'/><anchor id='Pg825'/>

<p>
The compilers only define the subject-matter of papal
infallibility by saying that it is identical with the infallibility
of the Church. But that explanation is
inadequate until the Council has defined the infallibility
of the Church. Hence it is clearly a logical
fallacy to prefix the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on the Primacy to that on
the Church. Of the infallibility of the Church we
know that it always acts within the proper limits of
its subject-matter, both because the common consent
of the Bishops is necessary and because the Church
is holy and cannot sin, while the compilers of this
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> on papal infallibility on the one hand, according
to their own statement, exclude the consent
of the Bishops, and on the other hand have not undertaken
to prove that every Pope is holy and cannot
sin.<note place='foot'>[On the essential connection between the infallibility and the impeccability
of the Popes, see <hi rend='italic'>Janus</hi>, pp. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, and Maret, <hi rend='italic'>Du Concile Général</hi>,
vol. ii. ch. 13.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note>
</p>

<p>
But if a form of definition was really discovered, it
would have to be confirmed by solid and certain proofs.
It would have to be shown that this doctrine of personal
infallibility is contained in holy Scripture, as it has
been always interpreted, and in the tradition of all
centuries, that it has the moral assent not merely of
some but of all Fathers, Doctors, Bishops and Theologians,
and that it is in perfect harmony with all
decisions and acts of the General Councils, and therefore
with the decrees of the fourth and fifth sessions of
the Council of Constance&mdash;for even supposing they
<pb n='826'/><anchor id='Pg826'/>
were not œcumenical, which I do not admit, they would
show the mind and common opinion of the theologians
and Bishops.<note place='foot'>[The decree of Constance defines that <q>every lawfully convoked
Œcumenical Council representing the Church derives its authority immediately
from Christ, and every one, the Pope included, is subject to it in
matters of faith, in the healing of schism, and the reformation of the
Church.</q> It was carried in full Council without a dissentient voice.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> It would further have to be proved that
this doctrine is neither contradicted by historical facts nor
by any acts of the Popes themselves, and lastly that it
belongs to that class of truths which the Council and
Pope in union can decide upon, as having been acknowledged
for revealed truth always, everywhere and by all.
</p>

<p>
All this our <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> omits. But when the question is
of defining a dogma, the Fathers must have sufficient evidence
laid before them and time allowed them for weighing
it. As it is, neither the original nor the revised draft of
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> supply such arguments as might illustrate the
matter and clear up all doubts, and as little is sufficient
time allowed&mdash;as is generally notorious&mdash;for unravelling
this complicated question, solving its difficulties and
acquiring the necessary information about it. In such
a matter, where a burden is to be laid on the conscience
of the faithful, a hasty decision pronounced without
absolute certainty is dangerous, while there is no danger
in a fuller discussion and in not deciding till it can be
done with complete certainty of conscience.
</p>

<p>
It would finally be necessary that the doctrine of
the personal and independent infallibility of the Pope,
after being clearly expressed and certainly proved,
should be accepted by the Fathers with moral unanimity;
<pb n='827'/><anchor id='Pg827'/>
for otherwise we must fear that the definition
would be regarded as a papal constitution and not a
decree of a Council.<note place='foot'>[That in fact is exactly what Antonelli calls it in his circular.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tr.</hi>]</note> It is a duty to impose a truth of
faith on all Christians, but this difficult and sacred
right can only be exercised by the Bishops with the
greatest caution. And therefore the Fathers of Trent,
as you all know, whatever sophistical objections may
be raised, did not pass their decrees on dogmatic questions
by numerical majorities, but with moral unanimity.
I content myself now with referring to the perplexity
of conscience among the faithful, which must arise from
passing this dogma over the heads of the minority, and
thus giving a handle for questioning the validity and
authority of this Council.
</p>

<p>
Two leading remarks may suffice on the practical
consequences of the dogma, for the only object of bringing
forward the personal infallibility as an article of
faith is to make the unity of the Church more compact
and the central authority stronger, and thus to supply
an efficient remedy for all abuses.
</p>

<p>
As regards unity and central authority, I must first
make the general observation that they exist and must
be preserved, not however in that shape which we may
fancy or which approves itself to our reason, but as
Jesus Christ our Lord ordained and as our fathers have
maintained it. For it is no business of ours to arrange
the Church according to our good pleasure and to alter
the foundation of the work of God. The necessary
unity in faith and that of the common central authority
<pb n='828'/><anchor id='Pg828'/>
under fatherly guidance exists and has always existed
among Catholics, or else one would have to say that
there had been some essential defect in the Church of
the past, which all will certainly deny.
</p>

<p>
The unity of doctrine and Church communion and
the central authority of the Pope remain then unshaken,
as they always flourished and flourish still without any
dogmatic definition of infallibility.
</p>

<p>
Let it not be said that this unity will hereafter be
closer when the central authority is stronger, for this
inference is fallacious. Mere unity is not enough, but
we must have that unity and that measure of it which
the nature and scope of the thing, as well as the law
and the necessity of life, demand. Else the thing itself
might lamentably perish by being forced into too rigid
an unity, from its inward vitality being cramped, disturbed
and broken through the external pressure. Thus
even in civil matters the unity of freemen, who act for
themselves under the law, is indeed looser but more
honourable than the unity of slaves tormented under
an arbitrary tyranny. Permit us to retain that unity
which belongs to us by the ordinance of Christ, and
that means of unity&mdash;viz., the central authority of
the Pope&mdash;which our forefathers acknowledged and
honoured, who neither separated the Bishops from the
Pope nor the Pope from the Bishops. Let us loyally
hold fast to the ancient rule of faith and the statutes of
the Fathers, and the more so since the proposed definition
is open to many grave objections.
</p>

<p>
And again we can hardly doubt that this expedient
<pb n='829'/><anchor id='Pg829'/>
would be powerless for healing the evils of our time, and
it must be feared would rather tend to the injury of many.
The matter must not be regarded only from a theological
standpoint, but also in its bearings on civil
society. For we in this place are not mere head-sacristans
or superiors of a monastery, but men called to share
with the Pope his care for the whole Church; allow us
therefore to take the state of the world into our prudent
consideration.
</p>

<p>
Will personal and independent infallibility serve to
rouse from their grave those perished Churches on the
African coast, or to wake the slumbers of the East,
which once bloomed with such flowers of intellect and
virtue? Will it be easier for our brethren, the Vicars-Apostolic,
to bring the heathen, Mahometans, and
schismatics to the Catholic faith, if they preach the
doctrine of the Pope's sole infallibility? Or will the
proposed definition perhaps infuse spirit and strength
into Protestants and other heretics to return to the
Roman Church and lay aside all prejudices and hatred
against it? And now, first, for Europe! I say it with
pain,&mdash;the Church is everywhere under ban. She is
excluded from those congresses where nations discuss
war and peace, and where once the authority of the Holy
See was so powerful, whereas now it is bidden not even
to proclaim its views. The Church is shut out in
several European countries from the Chambers, and if
some prelates or clergymen here and there belong to
them, this appears a rare occurrence. The Church is
shut out from the school, where grievous errors advance
<pb n='830'/><anchor id='Pg830'/>
unchecked; from legislation, which manifests a secular
and therefore irreligious tendency; and lastly, from the
family, where civil marriage corrupts morals. All those
who preside over the public affairs of Europe avoid us
or hold us in check.
</p>

<p>
And what sort of remedy do you offer the world,
which is diseased with so many uncertainties about the
Church? On all those who are seeking to shake off
from their indocile shoulders even the burdens imposed
on them from of old and reverently accepted by their
fathers, you would now lay a new, and therefore difficult
and odious, burden. All those who are of weak
faith are to be crushed by a new and inopportune
dogma, a doctrine never hitherto defined, and which,
without any amends being made for the injurious
manner of its introduction, is to be defined by a Council
of which many say that its freedom is insufficiently
attested. And yet you hope to remedy everything by
this definition of personal and exclusive infallibility, to
strengthen the faith and improve the morals of all.
Your hopes are vain. The world either remains sick
or perishes, not from ignorance of the truth and its
teachers, but because it avoids it and will not accept
its guidance. But if it now rejects the truth, when
proclaimed by the whole teaching body of the Church,
the 800 Bishops dispersed over the world and infallible
in union with the Pope, how much more will it do so,
when the truth is proclaimed by one single infallible
teacher, who has only just been declared infallible?
For an authority to be strong and effective, it is not
<pb n='831'/><anchor id='Pg831'/>
enough for it to be claimed; it must also be accepted.
And thus it is not enough to declare that the Pope is
infallible, personally and apart from the Bishops, but
he must be acknowledged as such by all, if his office is
to be a reality. What is the use, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, of an anathema,
if the authority which pronounces it is not respected?
The Syllabus circulated through Europe, but what evils
could it cure even where it was received as an infallible
oracle? There were only two large countries where
religion ruled, not in fact but <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>de jure</foreign>&mdash;Austria and
Spain. In both of them this Catholic order fell to the
ground though commanded by the infallible authority;
perhaps indeed in Austria on that very account.
</p>

<p>
Let us take things as they are. Not only will the
independent infallibility of the Pope not destroy these
prejudices and objections which draw away so many
from the faith, but it will increase and intensify
them. There are many who in heart are not alienated
from the Catholic Church, but who yet think of what
they term a separation of Church and State. It is certain
that several of the leaders of public opinion are on
this side, and will take occasion from the proposed
definition to effect their object. The example of France
will soon be copied more or less all over Europe, and to
the greatest injury of the clergy and the Church herself.
The compilers of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, whether they desire
it or not, are introducing a new era of mischief, if the
subject-matter of papal infallibility is not accurately
defined, or if it can be supposed that under the head of
morals the Pope will give decisions on the civil and
<pb n='832'/><anchor id='Pg832'/>
political acts of sovereigns and nations, laws and rights,
to which a public authority will be attributed.<note place='foot'>This is emphatically asserted in a sermon preached last year at Kensington
by Archbishop Manning, where he says, speaking in the Pope's
name, <q>I claim to be the Supreme Judge and director of the consciences
of men; of the peasant that tills the field and the prince that sits on the
throne; of the household that lives in the shade of privacy <emph>and the Legislature
that makes laws for kingdoms</emph>&mdash;I am the sole last Supreme Judge
of what is right and wrong.</q></note> Every
one of any political cultivation knows what seeds of
discord are contained in our <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, and to what perils
it exposes even the temporal power of the Holy See.
</p>

<p>
To explain this more minutely in detail would take
too long and might be indiscreet, for were I to say all,
I might easily bring forward things it is more prudent
to suppress. However, I have delivered my conscience,
so far as is allowed me, and so let my words be taken
in good part. I know well that everything in the world
has its difficulties, and one must not always shrink from
action because greater evil may follow. But I put the
matter before the reverend fathers, not that they may
instantly conform to my opinion, but in order that
they may give a full and ripe consideration to the
arguments of all parties. I know too that we must
not childishly quail before public opinion, but neither
should we obstinately resist it; it is wiser and more
prudent often to reconcile one's-self with it, and in
every case to take it into account. I know, lastly, that
the Church needs no arm of flesh, yet she does not reject
the approval and aid of civil society, and did not, I
think, look back with regret from the time of Constantine
<pb n='833'/><anchor id='Pg833'/>
to the time of Nero. So much for the practical
consequences of the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Finally, my desire is (1.) that the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> should be
deferred for a later discussion, because it has not been
introduced into the Council in a sufficiently worthy
manner; (2.) that it should meanwhile be revised, and
the limits of infallibility more accurately marked out, so
as to leave no handle for future sophistries and attacks;
(3.) but, best of all, that the question of infallibility
should be let drop altogether on account of its manifold
inconveniences.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='834'/><anchor id='Pg834'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix II.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Letters on the Council from French Bishops</hi>.<note place='foot'>These letters are taken from the <hi rend='italic'>Journal des Débats</hi> of May 6 and 11.
The Bishops of Marseilles and Montpellier are said to be the writers.</note>
</p>

<div>
<head>I.</head>

<p>
Votre judicieuse dissertation est pleine de sens et de
la meilleure critique; mais c'est bien de cela qu'il s'agit
aujourd'hui! On veut se tromper et tromper; le reste
importe peu. Ce qui importe le plus, ce qui nous
sauvera, je l'espère, mieux que toutes discussions avec
des gens de mauvaise foi ou de parti pris, c'est d'établir
des bases incontestables et de faire que la saine opinion
publique soutienne les vrais intérêts de l'Église.
</p>

<p>
1. Le Gallicanisme n'est pas une doctrine, pas même
une opinion, c'est une simple négation de prétentions
nées au onzième siècle, et une résistance à ces prétentions,
au nom de la tradition ancienne et constante des
Églises. L'ultramontanisme, au contraire, est une
doctrine, une opinion qui est venue s'entre sur le vieux
tronc et qui a poussé des jets de croyances positives.
Muselée au Concile de Florence, écartée au Concile de
<pb n='835'/><anchor id='Pg835'/>
Trente, cette opinion reparaît furieuse au Concile du
Vatican.
</p>

<p>
2. Le Gallicanisme est improprement nommé. Son <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>veto</foreign>
appartient à toutes les nations Catholiques. L'Espagne
en soutenait la force antique, Saint François de Sales en
vengeait les droits au nom des privileges de la maison
de Savoie, et aujourd'hui, nous autres Français, nous
l'avons trouvé faible chez nous, en comparaison de sa
vitalité en Allemagne, en Autriche, en Hongrie, en
Portugal, en Amérique, et jusqu'au fond de l'Orient.
</p>

<p>
3. Notre faiblesse, en ce moment, ne vient ni des
Écritures, ni de la tradition des Pères, ni des monumens
des Conciles Généraux et de l'histoire. Elle vient
de notre défaut de liberté, qui est radical. Une minorité
imposante qui représente la foi de plus de 100
millions de Catholiques, c'est-à-dire de presque la moitié
de l'Eglise universelle, est écrasée par le joug imposé de
règlemens restrictifs et contraires aux traditions conciliaires.
Par des députations que nous n'avons pas
réellement choisies et qui osent introduire dans le texte
discuté des paragraphes non discutés, par une commission
pour les interpellations imposée par l'autorité;
par le défaut absolu de discussion, réplique, objection,
interpellation; par des journaux que l'on encourage
pour la traquer, pour soulever contre elle le clergé des
diocèses; par les nonciatures qui viennent à la rescousse,
quand les journaux ne suffisent pas pour tout bouleverser,
c'est-à-dire pour ériger en témoins de la foi les
prêtres contre les évêques, et ne plus laisser à ces juges
divins que le rôle de députés du clergé secondaire avec
<pb n='836'/><anchor id='Pg836'/>
mandat impératif, et blâme si on ne répond pas au
mandat. La minorité est écrasée surtout par tout le
poids de la suprême autorité qui fait peser sur elle les
éloges et encouragemens qu'elle adresse, <emph>par brefs</emph>, aux
prêtres, et par toutes les manifestations à Dom Guéranger
contre M. de Montalembert et autres.
</p>

<p>
4. La majorité n'est pas libre; car elle se produit par
un appoint considérable de prélats qui ne sauraient
être témoins de la foi d'Églises naissantes ou mourantes.
Or, cet appoint, qui se compose du chiffre énorme de
tous les vicaires apostoliques, du chiffre relativement
trop fort des évêques Italiens et des États Pontificaux,
cet appoint n'est pas libre. C'est une armée toute faite,
toute acquise, endoctrinée, enrégimentée, disciplinée,
que l'on menace, si elle bronche, de la famine ou de la
<emph>disponibilité</emph>, et l'on a été jusqu'à donner de l'argent pour
ramener quelques transfuges. Donc, il est évident qu'il
n'y a pas de liberté suffisante.&mdash;La conclusion ultérieure
est qu'il n'y a pas <emph>œcuménicité nette et plausible</emph>. Et
ceci n'infirme en rien les vrais principes: l'Église est et
reste infaillible dans les Conciles Généraux; seulement
il faut que les conciles présentent tous les caractères
d'œcuménicité; convocation légitime, liberté pleine
pour les jugemens, confirmation par le Pape. Si une
seule de ces conditions manque, tout peut être révoqué
en doute. On a eu le Brigandage d'Ephèse, ce qui n'a
pas empêché d'avoir eu ensuite un vrai Concile de ce
nom. On pourrait avoir <hi rend='italic'>Ludibrium Vaticanum</hi>; ce qui
n'empêcherait pas de tout réparer dans de nouvelles et
sérieuses assises....
</p>

<pb n='837'/><anchor id='Pg837'/>

<p>
Vous pourrez répandre ces réflexions, je crois que le
grand remède aujourd'hui nous doit venir du dehors ...
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>II.</head>

<p>
Je n'ai point parle une seule fois, je ne parlerai pas
davantage dans la suite. Je n'aime ni les gens qui
posent, ni les choses complétement inutiles. <emph>J'agis</emph>
depuis quatre mois, et je crois avoir rendu quelques
services par ce moyen qui en dépit de toutes les
entraves, nous a donné trois représentations, une commission
internationale, des commissions de nations et
137 signataires<note place='foot'>Lire: spartiates.</note> qui succomberont avec honneur et
horions, si l'on continue à nous traiter aussi mal.
</p>

<p>
Je crois inutiles tous efforts pour résister à l'aveuglement
de l'orgueil moyen-âge, toutes Notes diplomatiques,
toutes menaces qui ne sauraient aboutir, et dont je
déplorerais le premier l'exécution, si elle était possible.
Le remède n'est pas là; on se jouera de tout, et on ira
triomphalement aux abîmes.
</p>

<p>
Quand on a affaire à des gens qui ne craignent
qu'une chose, il faut se servir de cette chose,&mdash;c'est-à-dire
de l'opinion publique.
</p>

<p>
Il faut par ce moyen établir ce qui est vrai&mdash;point
d'autorité parceque point de liberté. Le défaut de
liberté. Le défaut de liberté, gros comme des montagnes,
crève les yeux; il repose sur des faits notoires,
appréciables pour tous, et sa constatation publique est
la seule planche de salut dans la tourmente inouïe que
subit l'Église.
</p>

<pb n='838'/><anchor id='Pg838'/>

<p>
A notre arrivée, tout était fait sans nous. Toutes les
mailles du réseau étaient serrées, et les jésuites qui out
monté le traquenard ne doutaient pas un instant que
nous y serions pris. Ils voulaient nous faire poser par
enchantement la pierre angulaire de leur fronton, et se
seraient charges ensuite, sans nous, de bâtir le portail de
leur édifice en un clin d'œil.
</p>

<p>
Nous avons donc trouvé un règlement tout fait,&mdash;c'est-à-dire
des menottes. Pour faire droit à nos
plaintes, on a serré de plus belle, et nous jouissons de
l'ancien brodequin que Louis <hi rend='smallcaps'>xvi.</hi> a supprimé. Pour
être vrai, il faut dire que les tourmenteurs out fait la
chose avec toute la grâce imaginable. Nous avons
trouvé une majorité toute faite, très compacte, plus que
suffisante en nombre, parfaitement disciplinée et qui a
reçu au besoin instructions, injonctions, menaces, prison,
argent. Le système des candidatures officielles est distancé
de 100 kilomètres.
</p>

<p>
Une commission, la plus utile, celle où l'on peut
adresser ses réclamations, a été créée et imposée d'office.
</p>

<p>
Mais il faut dire à sa louange qu'elle ne fonctionne
pas, parce qu'elle ne répond jamais ou qu'elle ne repond
qu'aux membres de la majorité. Nous avons été libres
de nommer les autres commissions, c'est-à-dire que la
majorité fictive a pu les créer à l'aide de listes dressées
et lithographiées.
</p>

<p>
Restait la parole; mais à quelles conditions? Défense
de répliquer un mot, de discuter, d'éclairer. Si on voulait
parler, il fallait se faire inscrire, et le lendemain, ou
deux jours après, quand tout était refroidi, on pouvait
<pb n='839'/><anchor id='Pg839'/>
venir ennuyer l'assemblée par un discours. Défense
alors de sortir du thème donné aux écoliers (excepté
pour MM. de la majorité) et quand on a tenté de parler
de liberté, de règlement, de commission, d'acoustique, de
décentralisation, de désitalianisation, on a vu se produire
les scènes tumultueuses qui ont démoli les Cardinaux
Rauscher et Schwarzenberg, les Évêques de Colocza, de
Bosnie, d'Halifax, tandis qu'on trouvait bon que
Moulins, Belley et d'autres introduisissent de force la
grande question à propos de la vie des clercs.
</p>

<p>
La pauvre petite minorité est en butte aux injures,
aux calomnies, et traquée par la <hi rend='italic'>Civiltà</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>l'Univers</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>le
Monde</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>l'Union</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>l'Osservatore</hi> et <hi rend='italic'>la Correspondance de
Rome</hi>. Ces journaux sont autorisés et encouragés. Ils
soulèvent contre nous le clergé de nos diocèses, et ce
clergé applaudi. Un de nous a osé écrire contre son
collègue, est il n'a pas reçu un blâme officiel.
</p>

<p>
Mais voici ce qui achève d'opprimer notre liberté:
elle est écrasée de tout le poids du respect que nous
portons à notre chef.
</p>

<p>
La question est pendante; elle n'est pas même à
l'ordre du jour, les juges de droit divin sont réunis et
attendent pour la traiter. Or, en pleines assises, le chef
se sert de sa haute et divine autorité pour blâmer
devant les prêtres qui lui sont présentés <emph>leurs</emph> évêques
<emph>mineurs</emph>. Il fait l'éloge funèbre de M. de Montalembert
devant 400 personnes; il écrit à Dom Guéranger, à
l'Abbé de Cabrières de Nîmes, qui s'est dressé devant
l'Évêque d'Orléans, aux diocèses dont les prêtres font
des Adresses pour forcer la main à <emph>leurs mandataires</emph>;
<pb n='840'/><anchor id='Pg840'/>
et il fait tout cela en termes tels que <hi rend='italic'>la Gazette du Midi</hi>
et <foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>tutti quanti</foreign> déclarent qu'il n'est plus permis ni aux
évêques ni à personne de soutenir le contraire; et on
appelle cela de la liberté!
</p>

<p>
On nous menace de passer par-dessus une minorité
imposante, contrairement à toute la tradition, de fouler
aux pieds la règle suprême de saint Vincent de Lerins:
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus</foreign>. On prêche
que l'unanimité morale n'est pas nécessaire, que le chef
est maître de tout, et que nous devons rendre des services
et non point des sentences, faire de l'affection
quand il s'agit de la foi. Voilà notre liberté! Un
Cardinal me disait pour conclusion: <q>Mon cher, nous
allons aux abîmes.</q>
</p>

<p>
Tout cela est capable d'ébranler les faibles, de désagréger
ce qui tient à si peu.
</p>

<p>
Je crois vous avoir peint la position ce qu'elle est.
Priez pour nous, faites valoir la chose, parce qu'elle est
<emph>vraie</emph>, parce que je crois servir l'Eglise en vous la
révélant.
</p>

<p>
Après mes souffrances de cet hiver, je ne pense pas
pouvoir affronter les chaleurs.... D'ailleurs, Dieu seul
peut nous sauver.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='841'/><anchor id='Pg841'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix III.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Difficultés de la Situation a Rome.</hi><note place='foot'>From the <hi rend='italic'>Gazette de France</hi> of June 28. The Vicar-General of an
eminent French Bishop, who had been at Rome, is the reputed author.</note>
</p>

<div>
<head>I.</head>

<p>
La question de l'infaillibilité pontificale, devenue,
contre l'attente universelle, l'objet capital du Concile du
Vatican depuis son ouverture, ne semble pas toucher
encore à une solution immédiate. Cette grave question
qui devait, au dire de certains hommes, être définie par
acclamation dès les premières séances du Concile, puis
le jour de l'Epiphanie, puis, après de courts débats, pour
la fête de Saint Joseph ou le 25 Mars jour de l'Annonciation;
différée de jour en jour à raison des énormes
difficultés qu'elle rencontre, à la grande surprise des
partisans de l'infaillibilité, doit enfin, nous dit-on, être,
sans nouveau délai, résolue solennellement le 29 Juin,
jour de la fête du Prince des Apôtres. Si telle est
véritablement la pensée des Présidents du Concile, il
semble difficile qu'elle puisse se réaliser. Quelques
jours seulement nous séparent de cette solennité, et
près de cent orateurs sont inscrits pour traiter cette
question devant le Concile. Dans cette situation, il
faut qu'on choisisse entre trois partis: ou supprimer
<pb n='842'/><anchor id='Pg842'/>
toute discussion, ou proroger le Concile, ou exiger qu'il
poursuive ses travaux jusqu'à ce qu'enfin toutes les
difficultés soient pleinement éclaircies, et que tous les
Pères puissent donner leur suffrage en parfaite connaissance
de cause.
</p>

<p>
Supprimer, ou du moins restreindre la discussion de
telle sorte que la conscience d'un nombre considérable
de Pères qui sentent vivement toute la gravité de la
question et les difficultés de tout genre dont elle est
hérissée, ne soit pas pleinement satisfaite, ce serait
violer toutes les règles des délibérations conciliares que
nous voyons de siècle en siècle pratiquées avec la
liberté et la maturité la plus complète. Rien ne saurait
dispenser d'un examen approfondi, lorsqu'il s'agit d'imposer
un dogme nouveau à la croyance des fidèles; et,
au dire des théologiens, toute définition rendue sans
une discussion préalable qui porte jusqu'à l'évidence le
caractère de doctrine révélée dans le point mis en délibération,
demeure par cela même frappée de nullité.
Il suffit de parcourir rapidement les actes des Conciles
Œcuméniques pour se convaincre des patientes recherches,
de la sage lenteur qu'ils out apportées à leurs
délibérations; et il est incontestable que les questions
à résoudre dans ces grandes assemblées étaient loin de
présenter les difficultés qui se rencontrent dans celle
qui s'agite en ce moment. Le monde Chrétien n'ignore
pas cela, et il ne verrait pas d'un œil indifférent un
jugement solennel, en une matière qui touche à la
constitution même de l'Eglise, prononcé à la hâte et
par un coup de majorité.
</p>

<pb n='843'/><anchor id='Pg843'/>

<p>
Sans doute ceux qui tiennent dans leurs mains la
direction du Concile, se persuadent que la question est
depuis longtemps assez discutée pour qu'on sache à
quoi s'en tenir sans de plus amples recherches; et,
parce qu'à leurs yeux l'infaillibilité du Pape est une
vérité, ils regardent toute nouvelle discussion comme
une pure formalité que rien ne commande impérieusement.
Mais par cela même que la question est discutée
depuis plusieurs siècles, et que l'on discute encore avec
science, érudition et bonne foi, il faut conclure évidemment
que la lumière n'est pas encore faite à ce point
qu'on puisse dire que telle est incontestablement la
tradition antique et universelle.
</p>

<p>
Si à leurs yeux l'infaillibilité du Pape est une vérité
certainement révélée, et qu'ils tiennent à précipiter la
définition par égard pour certaines impatiences, ils ont
un moyen bien simple de les satisfaire, sans commettre
une violation des lois conciliaires. Dans le système ultramontain,
le Pape étant infaillible, et, du consentement
de tous les catholiques, l'Église universelle ne pouvant
jamais accepter l'erreur et y adhérer, toute définition <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex
cathedrâ</foreign> sera immanquablement suivie de l'assentiment
de tout le corps de l'Église. Pie <hi rend='smallcaps'>ix</hi>., assure-t-on, est profondément
convaincu de son infaillibilité comme Pontife
suprême. Eh bien! de deux choses l'une: ou il faut
que le concile agisse en concile, et par conséquent avec
circonspection, pesant avec une attention scrupuleuse
les raisons graves, les faits, les textes allégués de part
et d'autre; ou le Pape, en vertu de son autorité apostolique,
par un acte des plus solennels, doit trancher
<pb n='844'/><anchor id='Pg844'/>
toutes les difficultés et définir lui-même le dogme de
cette infaillibilité qu'il croit être un apanage essentiel
de la dignité suprême dont il est revêtu. Pourquoi ne
pas tenter cette expérience? Si l'Église adhère à sa
décision, son infaillibilité est très canoniquement établie:
si elle n'adhère pas, il est évident qu'il ne peut prétendre
à ce privilège. La question est alors définitivement
établie, et toute dispute cesse. Jusqu'ici, aucune
décision nette, précise et solennelle sur ce point n'a été
donnée; hésiter sur l'emploi de ce moyen, ne serait-ce
pas douter de cette infaillibilité? Et si, en l'écartant
on veut que le Concile prenne lui-même la responsabilité
d'une définition dogmatique, il est alors de toute convenance,
de toute justice, de toute nécessité qu'il ne
prononce qu'après l'examen le plus approfondi.
</p>

<p>
L'état des esprits dans le Concile et hors du Concile,
les discours prononcés, les écrits nombreux publiés de
part et d'autre, prouvent évidemment, aux yeux de
quiconque juge sans parti pris et avec une parfaite impartialité,
que la question, depuis 1682, pour ne pas
remonter plus haut, n'a pas encore fait un seul pas;
elle en est toujours au même point. L'étude la plus
attentive de la Tradition n'a pas donné de nouvelles
lumières à ceux qui sont capables de ces études, et sans
doute l'état de la question dans cette sphère mérite une
attention tout exceptionnelle, et bien différente de celle
que prétend attirer sur soi un enthousiasme factice ou
irréfléchi.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='845'/><anchor id='Pg845'/>

<div>
<head>II.</head>

<p>
La prorogation du Concile serait done la mesure la
plus rationelle et la plus prudente. Mais les impatiences
provoquées, enflammées de plus en plus par toute
sorte de manœuvres, comment les contenir? Ces
feuilles, ces écrits, cette propagande pieuse, qui les
excitaient par la promesse d'une satisfaction prochaine,
tout cela ne va-t-il pas devenir l'objet d'un mépris
universel, pour avoir leurré si longtemps les âmes
honnêtes et religieuses d'une espérance si lente à se
réaliser? Mais que faire! Telle est la difficulté de la
situation qu'on a si imprudemment créée. S'il faut que
le Concile décide, il ne reste plus qu'à le proroger, pour
qu'il puisse un peu plus tard reprendre ses travaux avec
toute la patience et la liberté d'esprit qu'ils réclament:
ou bien il faut qu'il les poursuive actuellement sans
désemparer, jusqu'à ce qu'enfin tout soit mûr pour le
jugement à prononcer.
</p>

<p>
Mais ici deux tristes réflexions se présentent à
l'esprit. D'abord, quelle rigueur,&mdash;le mot n'est pas
excessif, et on l'a entendu sortir de la bouche de bonnes
femmes Romaines, au moment où les vénérables Pères
faisaient cortège au Sauveur du monde porté en triomphe
à la procession solennelle de la Fête-Dieu;&mdash;quelle
rigueur ne serait-ce pas de retenir plus longtemps, dans
cette saison de chaleurs accablantes, sous un climat que
les Romains eux-mêmes se hâtent de fuir à cette époque
de l'année, des vieillards épuisés par l'âge, par les infirmités,
par les fatigues de tout genre, fatigues du corps,
<pb n='846'/><anchor id='Pg846'/>
fatigues de l'esprit, angoisses de l'âme en présence des
plus terribles dangers pour leurs troupeaux particuliers,
pour l'Église universelle, pour la société tout entière;
des vieillards qui sentent le poids énorme de cette
responsabilité, qui entendent tous les jours la voix de
l'opinion publique, et la voix plus puissante et plus
pénétrante de la religion alarmée; des vieillards, parmi
lesquels plusieurs ont déjà succombé, plusieurs autres
sont atteints de maladie, tous sont privés de l'air vivifiant
du pays natal, des soins particuliers que ne sauraient
donner des mains étrangères, des consolations qu'un
pasteur fidèle trouve toujours au milieu d'un peuple
qui l'aime.
</p>

<p>
Les séances en Congrégation Générale, continuées
presque tous les jours sans interruption, durent, depuis
huit heures et demie du matin jusqu'à une heure
de l'après-midi. Le devoir de la prière, la récitation
de l'office canonial, la méditation des matières à discuter,
la préparation des discours à prononcer, rien de
tout cela ne peut être suspendu. Des jeunes gens
robustes ne résisteraient pas longtemps à ce travail si
multiplié, si continu, à l'effort d'une attention soutenue
pendant les longues heures des séances conciliaires
sur des questions qui ne pèsent pas uniquement sur la
pensée, mais aussi et plus encore sur la conscience, et
enfin à l'action accablante des fortes chaleurs, dont
l'intensité, par l'agglomeration de six cents prélats, redouble
sans mesure dans une salle d'ailleurs extrêmement
incommode sous tous les rapports. On entend
les plus vigoureux de corps et d'esprit déclarer qu'ils
<pb n='847'/><anchor id='Pg847'/>
sont à bout de forces. Et l'on persisterait encore à
les retenir!
</p>

<p>
Mais il y aurait encore là quelque chose de plus
grave. Retenir les évêques jusqu'à ce qu'une définition
de l'infaillibilité pontificale ait pu être rendue
après une discussion parfaitement libre, et aussi longue
qu'on doit l'augurer du nombre des orateurs inscrits
et des questions graves et nombreuses qui se rattachent
à cette définition, c'est leur dire: évêques, il faut vous
résoudre à mourir ou à bâcler en toute hâte un jugement
duquel dépendent les destinées de l'Église et du
monde. Oui, mourez, accablées par l'ennui, la fatigue,
le climat dévorant, l'âge et les infirmités; ou, si vous
tenez à vivre encore, foulez aux pieds les règles les
plus sacrées des conciles, sacrifiez votre conscience, et
avec la vôtre celle de plusieurs millions d'âmes!
</p>

<p>
Sous le rapport de la liberté de discussion, bien
des choses dans le Concile du Vatican ne ressemblent
pas aux anciens Conciles Généraux, toujours vénérés
dans l'Église. Au dedans, au dehors, un parti a exercé
sur les Pères une pression toujours croissante. Au dedans,
des règlements mal faits, des interruptions sans
cause, dont le résultat inévitable était de décourager
les hommes les plus fermes, et d'empêcher ou d'affaiblir
la manifestation de la vérité; une certaine fraction
de l'assemblée, turbulente, impétueuse, arrêtant par des
murmures les prélats les plus vénérables dont la doctrine
ne se pliait pas à ses idées; les présidents fermant les
yeux sur ces faits et n'ayant de sévérités que pour les
adversaires de l'infaillibilité; la discussion brusquement
<pb n='848'/><anchor id='Pg848'/>
arrêtée au gré de ceux qu'elle déconcertait. Au
dehors, des journalistes qui ne cessaient de prodiguer
l'insulte aux évêques contraires à leurs opinions.
</p>

<p>
Rome est tout émue d'un fait récent concernant
l'un des membres les plus éminents du Concile, le Cardinal
Guidi, Archevêque de Bologne, précédemment
religieux Dominicain, et très célèbre professeur de théologie
dans la capitale du monde Chrétien. Il avait
parlé dans le Concile sur la question de l'infaillibilité,
exigeant pour celle des définitions pontificales le concours
de l'épiscopat. Le jour même, il est mandé et
admonesté du ton le plus sévère. <q>Saint-Père, a répondu
le cardinal, j'ai dit aujourd'hui ce que j'ai enseigné
au grand jour pendant plusieurs années à votre
collège de la Minerve, sans que jamais personne ait
trouvé cet enseignement repréhensible. L'orthodoxie
de mon enseignement avait dû être attestée à votre
Sainteté lorsqu'elle daigna me choisir pour aller à
Vienne combattre certains docteurs allemands dont les
principes ébranlaient les fondements de la foi catholique.
Que mon discours d'aujourd'hui soit soumis à
l'examen d'une commission de théologiens; je ne redoute
pas ce jugement.</q> Des paroles menaçantes pour
le cardinal ont terminé cet entretien. Le matin, après
la séance, un prélat domestique disait dans la salle
même du Concile: après un pareil discours, le cardinal
devrait etre enfermé pendant dix jours dans un couvent
pour y vaquer aux exercices spirituels.
</p>

<p>
La puissance absolue du Pape, son opinion visible,
le pouvoir arbitraire qu'exercent les présidents, la pétulance
<pb n='849'/><anchor id='Pg849'/>
de certains prélats, trop notoirement passionnés
et violents; tout cela pèse sensiblement sur les
membres les plus sages de l'assemblée qui ne peuvent
s'empêcher de s'en plaindre avec tristesse dans des
entretiens intimes. Faut-il s'étonner que plusieurs, le
fait est très certain, expriment le désir d'un vote secret,
s'il était possible?
</p>

<p>
C'est avec une douleur profonde que nous racontons
toutes ces choses. Mais la situation de l'Église en ce
moment est telle qu'on ne peut se dispenser de parler.
Au Concile du Vatican se traite une question de l'ordre
le plus élevé Chacun a le droit de savoir comment
est conduit ce grand procès, qui est le procès de tous.
Il s'agit de la paix du monde, il s'agit aussi de choses
qui sont au-dessus de tous les intérêts périssables, de la
foi, de la conscience et du salut éternel des âmes.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='850'/><anchor id='Pg850'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix IV.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Letter of a French Bishop to Count Daru.</hi>
</p>

<p>
On sait à Rome que vous aviez l'intention de rédiger
une note ou un memorandum qui devrait être appuyé
par les puissances.
</p>

<p>
Si vous agissez, vous serez appuyés. Ici les diplomates
se plaignent de votre inaction.
</p>

<p>
Mais il faut agir immédiatement, on veut introduire
l'infaillibilité après Pâques.
</p>

<p>
Vous ne pouvez rien faire par le M. de Banneville.
Ses collègues ne le comptent pour rien, sinon pour un
obstacle.
</p>

<p>
Il ne faut pas vous mettre exclusivement sur le
terrain des canons des Ecclesia. On vous répondrait,
soit en supprimant les Canons auxquels vous vous
opposez; soit en disant que cela ne vous touche pas,
à cause du concordat; soit, enfin, en les expliquant
dans un sens qui vous paraîtra satisfaisant, quitte à
décréter après tous les Canons, tous les Syllabus qu'ils
voudront, et les plus formidables. Mais il y a un
terrain où vous êtes invincibles, et sur lequel les
puissances vous suivent. C'est celui de la liberté du
<pb n='851'/><anchor id='Pg851'/>
Concile et du droit publique de l'Église, sous la protection
duquel vos évêques sont venus à Rome.
</p>

<p>
Cette liberté n'existe plus. Ce droit est violé sur
un point que plus de 100 évêques ont déclaré de la
dernière importance.
</p>

<p>
Leur protestation vous donne un point de départ et
des arguments invincibles.
</p>

<p>
Ces évêques déclarent que le Règlement est contraire
à la loi de l'Église sur le point décisif de la
Majorité. Car ce droit, depuis Nicée jusqu'à Trente,
déclare que la règle indisputable et certaine pour les
définitions dogmatiques c'est l'unanimité morale, et
non la majorité.
</p>

<p>
Un nombre immense de faits confirme leur protestation:
</p>

<p>
Les scènes de violence faites à Haynald et à Strossmayer.&mdash;Les
Présidents n'ont pas cherché à protéger
leur droit et liberté de parole, tout au contraire.
</p>

<p>
La précipitation de la discussion par les Présidents.
</p>

<p>
Le Schema de Fide, 4 chapitres, 20 pages, canons
avec anathèmes, a été distribué 24 heures seulement
avant l'ouverture de la discussion, on a voté sur 47
amendements en 5 quarts d'heure.
</p>

<p>
Le lendemain de là scène avec Strossmayer, on a
lu un <hi rend='italic'>Monitum</hi>, non pas pour admonéter les interrupteurs,
mais pour recommander aux orateurs de se
presser, de peur qu'ils n'ennuyent l'assemblée, et n'en
provoquent des manifestations.
</p>

<p>
Ce <hi rend='italic'>Monitum</hi> est une provocation aux interruptions.
Quelquefois un évêque est reçu avec des murmures
avant de commencer.
</p>

<pb n='852'/><anchor id='Pg852'/>

<p>
Les demandes de la Minorité:
</p>

<p>
D'une salle où on puisse les entendre.
</p>

<p>
De bureaux, pour les discussions préliminaires, qui
enverraient des Commissaires à la Députation.
</p>

<p>
De la liberté d'imprimer leurs discours et mémoires
pour les distribuer parmi les pères.
</p>

<p>
Que les auteurs d'amendements puissent les expliquer
et les défendre dans la Commission, et puissent
avoir le droit de répondre dans les discussions.
</p>

<p>
D'un procès-verbal des séances.
</p>

<p>
Sur la majorité et l'unanimité.
</p>

<p>
Toutes ces demandes sont restées sans réponse et
sans effet.
</p>

<p>
La pression exercée sur les Orientaux.
</p>

<p>
La scène faite au Patriarche Chaldéen.
</p>

<p>
L'emprisonnement intimé à l'Archévêque d'Antioche
et au chef de sa communauté.
</p>

<p>
L'arrestation et les coups donnés au prêtre, secrétaire
de l'Arch. de Diarbelair.
</p>

<p>
Les menaces aux Melchites, Maronites, et Chaldéens.
</p>

<p>
Le langage tenu par le pape lui même. Les cas de
Montalembert et de Falloux.
</p>

<p>
Les lettres du pape à Guéranger, Cabrières, etc.,
traitant les Évêques de l'Opposition en ennemis.
</p>

<p>
Les allocutions publiques roulant presque toutes sur
l'Infaillibilité.
</p>

<p>
Les cadeaux faits aux Vicaires Apostoliques en les
priant de ne pas l'abandonner.
</p>

<p>
Attitude de la presse approuvée par le Vatican,
exploitant ces lettres, et appelant les évêques à se retracter,
en les dénonçant à leur clergé.
</p>

<pb n='853'/><anchor id='Pg853'/>

<p>
Même le journal officiel de Rome traitant la minorité
d'alliés des Franc-maçons. Après tout cela, il n'y a pas
de liberté au Concile.
</p>

<p>
L'ambassadeur que vous enverrez en recevra des
preuves péremptoires. Les autres puissances sont déjà
plus avancées que la France: la Prusse, la Hongrie,
même la Turquie.
</p>

<p>
A nom de l'ordre publique menacé par l'inévitable
refus de reconnaître ce Concile. Au nom de votre droit,
ayant rendu possible la réunion du Concile, de protéger
la liberté de vos évêques.
</p>

<p>
Dire&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Ce Concile ne peut pas continuer dans les conditions
actuelles.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Nous protestons dès à présent contre la Non-liberté
manifeste du Concile.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Achevez ce que vous avez déjà commencé.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Il y a des points sur lesquels vous pouvez espérer
l'unanimité morale, sans violation de liberté.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Tenez une session publique sur les <hi rend='italic'>Schema de Fide</hi>
et de Discipline assez pour sauver votre honneur.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>Et prorogez une assemblée qui, aux yeux des
évêques et du monde, ne possède plus ces conditions
d'ordre et de liberté sans lesquelles ce n'est pas un Concile.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nous désirons que nos évêques retournent dans leurs
diocèses jusqu'à ce que les conditions soient plus favorables
pour la célébration d'un Concile.</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='854'/><anchor id='Pg854'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix V.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Protestation contre le projet de précipiter la
Discussion.</hi>
</p>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Presented early in May.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
Permettez, Monseigneur, que je proteste ici contre
un tel projet, s'il existe, et que je consigne entre vos
mains ma protestation. Saisir ainsi, irrégulièrement et
violemment, le Concile de cette question, c'est absolument
impossible.
</p>

<p>
Cette discussion immédiate de l'Infaillibilité Pontificale,
avant toutes les autres questions qui la doivent
nécessairement précéder, ce renversement de l'ordre et
de la marche régulière du Concile, cette précipitation
passionnée dans l'affaire la plus délicate, et qui par sa
nature et ses difficultés, exige le plus de maturité et de
calme, tout cela serait non seulement illogique et
absurde, inconcevable, mais encore trahirait trop ouvertement
aux yeux du monde entier, chez ceux qui
imaginent de tels procédés, le dessein de peser sur le
Concile, et pour dire le vrai mot, serait absolument
contraire à la liberté des évêques.
</p>

<p>
Comment une telle question, sous-introduite tout à
<pb n='855'/><anchor id='Pg855'/>
coup dans un chapitre annexé à un grand <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign>, le
dessein de ceux qui nous ont été soumis, passerait avant
tous les schemata déjà étudiés, avant toutes les autres
questions déjà discutées, et non encore résolues par le
Concile.
</p>

<p>
Des questions fondamentales, essentiellement préliminaires
à toutes les autres; Dieu, sa personnalité, sa
providence, Jésus-Christ, sa divinité, sa redemption, sa
grâce, l'Église, on laisserait tout celà de coté pour se précipiter
sur cette question, dont nous n'avions entendu
parler avant le Concile presque qu'à des Journalistes,
dont la bulle de convocation ne parlait pas, dont le
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Schema</foreign> sur l'Église lui-même ne disait pas un seul mot.
</p>

<p>
Et l'examen de cette nouvelle question, si compliquée,
cette discussion, si nécessaire, cette définition si grave,
tout cela se ferait à la hâte, violemment, au pied levé.
On ne nous laisserait ni le temps ni la liberté d'étudier
un point si important de doctrine avec gravité et à fond,
comme il doit l'être. Car aucun évêque ne peut, sans
blesser gravement sa conscience, déclarer de foi, sous
peine de damnation éternelle, un point de doctrine de
la révélation duquel il n'est pas absolument certain. Ce
serait, Monseigneur, dans le monde entier, une stupeur
et un scandale. Ce serait de plus autoriser trop manifestement
les calomnies de ceux qui disent que dans la
convocation du Concile, il y a eu une arrière pensée, et
que cette question qui n'était pas l'objet du Concile,
au fond devait être tout le Concile. Ceux qui poussent
à de tels excès oublient clairement toute prudence: il y
a un bon sens et une bonne foi publique qu'on ne blesse
pas impunément.
</p>

<pb n='856'/><anchor id='Pg856'/>

<p>
Sans doute on peut passer par dessus toutes les recriminations
des ennemis de l'Église; mais il y a des
difficultés avec lesquelles il faut nécessairement compter.
Eh bien! Éminence, si les choses venaient à se
passer de la sorte, je le dis avec toute la conviction de
mon âme, il y aurait lieu de craindre que des doutes
graves ne s'élèvent touchant la vérité même et la liberté
de ce Concile du Vatican.
</p>

<p>
Que les choses se passent ainsi, on le peut, si on le
veut: on peut tout, contre la raison et le droit, avec la
force du nombre.
</p>

<p>
Mais c'est lendemain, Éminence, que commenceraient
pour vous et pour l'Église les difficultés.
</p>

<p>
Par un procédé aussi contraire à l'ordre régulier des
choses, à la marche essentielle des assemblées d'évêques
qui ont été de vrais Conciles, vous susciteriez incontestablement
une lutte dans l'Église et les consciences sur
la question de l'issue œcuménique de notre assemblée:
c'est à dire, tout ce qu'on peut imaginer aujourd'hui de
plus désastreux.
</p>

<p>
Ceux qui essayent d'engager le Pape dans cette voie,
en l'abusant et le trompant, sont bien coupables. Mais
je ne doute pas que la sagesse du Saint-Père ne déjoue
toutes ces menées.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='857'/><anchor id='Pg857'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Advertisement.</head>

<p>
Third Edition, Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Pope and the Council.</hi>
</p>

<p>
By Janus.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Authorized Translation From The German.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Opinions of the Press.
</p>

<p>
<q>Had the book been, as its title might at first seem to imply, merely a
Zeitschrift evoked by the exigencies of the present controversy, we should not
have noticed it here. It is because it has an independent and permanent interest
for the historical and theological student, quite apart from its bearing
on the controversies of the day, and contains a great deal of what, to the
immense majority of English, if not also of German readers, will be entirely
new matter, grouped round a common centre-point which gives unity and
coherence to the whole, that it falls strictly within the province of this
journal.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Academy</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 9</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>In this volume the main idea of the writers, the long fatal growth of the
principles which are now about to develop into the dogma of the Pope's
personal and exclusive infallibility, is traced in full detail, with a learning
which would be conspicuous in any of the divided branches of the Church,
with a plain-speaking which few Roman Catholics have been able to afford,
and with a sobriety and absence of exaggeration not common among Protestants.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Guardian</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>October 13</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>A profound and learned treatise, evidently the work of one of the first
theologians of the day, discussing with the scientific fulness and precision
proper to German investigation, the great doctrinal questions expected to
come before the Council, and especially the proposed dogma of Papal Infallibility.
There is probably no work in existence that contains at all, still less
within so narrow a compass, so complete a record of the origin and growth of
the infallibilist theory, and of all the facts of Church history bearing upon it,
and that too in a form so clear and concise as to put the argument within the
reach of any reader of ordinary intelligence, while the scrupulous accuracy of
the writer, and his constant reference to the original authorities for every
statement liable to be disputed, makes the monograph as a whole a perfect
storehouse of valuable information for the historical or theological student.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Saturday
Review</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 16</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>It affords an opportunity for persons in this country to learn, on the
most direct authority, how the grave questions which just now agitate the
Church are regarded by members of a school within her pale, who profess to
yield to none in their loyal devotion to Catholic truth, but are unable to
identify its interests with the advance of Ultramontanism. Its aim is to show
that the object in chief of the coming Council is to elect Papal Infallibility
into an article&mdash;and therefore inevitably a cardinal article&mdash;of the Catholic
Faith. It purports to investigate by the light of history this and other questions
which are to be decided at the Council, as well as to serve as a contribution
to ecclesiastical history.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Morning Post</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 20</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='858'/><anchor id='Pg858'/>

<p>
<q>The concluding words of the volume, coming as they evidently do from
a great leader of thought among German Catholics, are so startling and suggestive
that we give the passage as it stands, while exhorting our readers to
lose no time in procuring and carefully perusing the whole volume for themselves.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Church
Herald</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 20</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is our intention to deal with this book hereafter as it deserves, for we
have reason to believe, we will not say to know, lest we should imitate the
vicious example of Janus, that the work is a fabrication of English and
German hands. Its name has been well chosen; Janus had two faces, which
nationally may mean English and German, but in morals signifies a character
not highly estimable for truth.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tablet</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 16</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>This extraordinary work should be read by the millions of Protestant
England, as the ablest and most authentic exposure of the ecclesiastical and
political despotism of Popery which exists in any language or any country.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rock</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>October 20</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>We feel, as we have already said, that it is hardly possible in a review to
give an adequate idea of the volume before us, considered merely as a storehouse
of facts on the Roman controversy, a value enhanced by the circumstance
that it is written by earnest but sorrowing members of that Church,
who desire, by its publication, to avert the progress of corruption and to save
the Church from the blundering threatened by the action of the Council. We
had marked many passages for extract in the course of our own examination.
Space, however, forbids our indulging ourselves. We regret this the less because
we feel assured that the book which we have so imperfectly noticed will
soon be in the hands of most persons interested in the question which is
debated.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>John Bull</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 23</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is of great importance at such a crisis that the public mind should be
thoroughly informed as to the points on which the judgment of the Council is
to be asked, or, to speak more correctly, as to the monstrous claims of the
Papacy to which it is expected to give its formal submission. Especially is it
desirable to understand clearly the exact position occupied by the <q>Liberal
Catholics,</q> men who are not prepared to forsake their Church nor to declare
war against all progress, and who, despite many discouragements, still cling
to the belief that it is possible to find some mode of reconciliation between
<q>Catholic</q> principles and modern ideas, and who resent such fanatical outbursts
as that of Archbishop Manning even more bitterly than Protestants
themselves. We attach, therefore, great value to a little volume just issued
on the <q>Pope and the Council,</q> by Janus, which contains a more complete
statement of the whole case than we have anywhere met with.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nonconformist</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>October 27</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Beginning with a sketch of the errors and contradictions of the Popes, and
of the position which, as a matter of history, they held in the early Church,
the book proceeds to describe the three great forgeries by which the Papal
claims were upheld&mdash;the Isidorian decretals, the donation of Constantine, and
the decretum of Gratian. The last subject ought to be carefully studied by
all who wish to understand the frightful tyranny of a complicated system of
laws, devised not for the protection of a people, but as instruments for grinding
them to subjection. Then, after an historical outline of the general growth of
the Papal power in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the writers enter
upon the peculiarly episcopal and clerical question, pointing out how marvellously
every little change worked in one direction, invariably tending to throw
<pb n='859'/><anchor id='Pg859'/>
the rule of the Church into the power of Rome; and how the growth of new
institutions, like the monastic orders and the Inquisition, gradually withdrew
the conduct of affairs from the Bishops of the Church in general, and consolidated
the Papal influence. For all this, however, unless we could satisfy ourselves
with a mere magnified table of contents, the reader must be referred to
the book itself, in which he will find the interest sustained without flagging
to the end.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pall Mall Gazette</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 29</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is very able, learned, compact, and conclusive. The subject of Papal
Infallibility is admirably treated, with a thorough mastery of Church history.
We commend it to the perusal of all who take an interest in the progress of
ecclesiastical questions, and wish to become more nearly acquainted with
the Romish Church, its doings, pretensions, decrees&mdash;especially with the
conduct of its successive heads. It is a perfect storehouse of facts brought
together with telling effect. Let the voice of these German Catholics be
listened to by enlightened Englishmen of all creeds, and they will be in no
danger of ensnarement from the plausible rhetoric of Ultramontanism, whose
principles are opposed to our free institutions&mdash;to the glory and strength of
England.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Athenæum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>October 30</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>In France, in Holland, and in Germany, there has already appeared a
multitude of disquisitions on this subject. Among these several are the
acknowledged compositions of men of high standing in the Roman Catholic
world,&mdash;men admittedly entitled to speak with the authority that must attach
to established reputation: but not one of them has hitherto produced a work
more likely to create a deep impression than the anonymous German publications
at the head of this notice. It is not a piece of merely polemical writing,
it is a treatise dealing with a large subject in an impressive though partisan
manner&mdash;a treatise grave in tone, solid in matter, and bristling with forcible
and novel illustrations.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Spectator</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>November 6</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is, as all our readers know, a history of how the Papal claims have
grown from their modest germs in the <emph>fifth</emph>, down to their full development in
the <emph>sixteenth</emph> century. This history, too, is accompanied by a corresponding
exhibition of the inconsistency of these claims with actual facts. But the
work is done with such elaborate care, and with such a well-marshalled and
complete view of the historical facts of the case, that it may well be bought
and read irrespective of the circumstances which have called it forth. It is a
full, able, and learned bill of indictment against Popery proper.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Literary
Churchman</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>November 13</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>This book, characterized by great ability, singular grasp, and scholarship,
demonstrates, with proof infallible, that the Ultramontane doctrine of the
Pope's infallibility is the centre of an arch based upon error, raised by cunning
craft, settled and cemented by shameless treachery. And this most damaging
exposure of Popery proceeds from divines calling themselves <q>faithful
Catholics.</q> No Ultramontane is able to sneer at the scholarship of the book;
nor can they take off the edge of its blows by ascribing it to the malice of
Protestants.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Record</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>November 17</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yet on this and other documents of the same kind, the whole fabric of
Papal power and assumption has been built up. The forged donations of
Constantine, Pepin, and Charlemagne are the title-deeds by which its possessions
are held, and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Liber Pontificalis</foreign>, and Isidorian decretals, are the
authorities on which it rests for the assertion of a power inconsistent alike
with the rights of God and the liberties of man. We know of no book in which
<pb n='860'/><anchor id='Pg860'/>
the whole process is exposed with the same completeness and in the same
brief compass, and we commend it to our readers as one from which they will
derive an amount of valuable information for which otherwise they might
search in vain.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>English Independent</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>November 18</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>The book before us is making England and Germany ring with valiant
and wise words of warning, which ought to make the representative of St.
Peter weep tears of honest grief over past and present, the crooked policy
of the one and the headstrong ambition of the other. As a rule, we may say
that anti-Papal literature is of the lowest grade of literary merit, filled with
illogical and inconclusive reasoning, and characterized by ignorance, bigotry,
and cant. The present work is a splendid exception, severe in tone, but not
unduly so, clear in statement, and unsparing in its dissection of the contradictions
involved in modern Ultramontane theories. Its German authorship
secures for it patient and exhaustive treatment of the subject; its Catholic
origin places its statements far above the ordinary suspicions of unfairness,
while it raises our admiration for the love of truth, which could lead men to
oppose so bravely the current of popular Roman thought.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Church Times</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>November 26</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now, what this book of Janus proves is, that all these <foreign rend='italic'>à priori</foreign> reasons
for Papal Infallibility are absolutely worthless. They are beaten off the stage
entirely and altogether. There is not the smallest atom of ground for them
to stand upon.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Church Review</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>November 27</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>This work, written by continental Roman Catholics of the liberal school,
will be read in Protestant England with the deepest interest, and on more
accounts than one. Accustomed as we are so much to view this great
Church system of Rome with feelings of antagonism, it is well we should
know and learn to sympathize with able and earnest men within its body, who
are keenly alive to its weaknesses, and are anxiously seeking for light as to how
Christianity, as they have received it, may help to solve the perplexities of the
age. We should hope that no Protestant who reads this able treatise will feel
differently. At the same time, it has no little value for us Protestants, in
days when our Protestantism is so scornfully arraigned among ourselves; for
if anything can justify our position and deepen our gratitude to a merciful
Providence that has ruled our history, it is a candid work like this, proceeding
from what we must call the opposite camp.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Contemporary Review</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>December</hi>.
</p>

<p>
<q>Rumour will, no doubt, be busy with its conjectures as to the name which
lurks beneath the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>nom de plume</foreign> of <q>Janus.</q> We do not intend to offer any
contribution towards the elucidation of the mystery, unless it be a contribution
to say that the book bears internal evidence of being the work of a Catholic,
and that there are not many Catholics in Europe who could have written it.
Taking it all in all, it is no exaggerated praise to characterize it as the most
damaging assault on Ultramontanism that has appeared in modern times. Its
learning is copious and complete, yet so admirably arranged that it invariably
illustrates without overlaying the argument. The style is clear and simple,
and there is no attempt at rhetoric. It is a piece of cool and masterly dissection,
all the more terrible for the passionless manner in which the author
conducts the operation.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Times</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>December 3</hi>.
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
